THE LIFE OF INSECTS

THE LIFE OF INSECTS

Born in 1962 in Moscow, Victor Pelevin has swiftly been recognized as the

leading Russian novelist of the new generation. Before studying at
Moscow's Gorky Institute of Literature, he worked in a number of jobs,
including as an engineer on a project to protect MiG fighter planes from
insect interference in tropical conditions. One of the few novelists today
who writes seriously about what is happening in contemporary Russia, he has, according to the New York Times, `the kind of mordant,
astringent turn of mind that in the pre-glasnost era landed writers in
psychiatric hospitals or exile'. George Saunders in Spin described him as
`a brilliant satirist of things Soviet, but also of things human: our
petty squabbles, half assed inventions, and, above all, our corruptible
dreams'.
In 1993 his collection of short stories, The Blue Lantern, won the Russian `Little Booker' Prize. His first two novels, Omon Ra and The Life o
f Insects, have earned him international acclaim. Victor Pelevin was
selected by The New Yorker as one of the best European writers under
thirty-five.
Andrew Bromfield was born in Hull, and graduated in Russian Studies
from the University of Sussex. His varied career has included lecturing
in Russian for 12 years and teaching English in Yerevan, Soviet Armenia. From 1988 to 1993 he lived and worked in Moscow, where he was
involved in setting up Glas, an English-language journal of contemporary Russian writing, of which he was co-editor. He has translated
widely from Russian, in both poetry and prose, including Victor
Pelevin's Omon Ra, The Blue Lantern and The Clay Machine-Gun. He
now lives and works in London.

The Life of Insects
VICTOR PELEVIN

Translated from the Russian
by Andrew Bromfield

A NEW DIRECTIONS BOOK

Contents
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

The Russian Forest,
Initiation,
Vivre pour Vivre,
The Moth Drawn to the Light,
The Third Rome,
A Life for the Tsar,
In Memory of Marcus Aurelius,
Insect Murder,
The Black Rider,
Flight over the Nest of the Enemy,
The Well,
Paradise,
Three Feelings of a Young Mother,
The Second World,
Entomoepilogue,

3
16
28
38
47
58
67
78
89
103
113
123
137
149
158

Translator's note:
Mitya and Dima are both diminutive forms of he Russian name Dmitry.

The Life of Insects

1 The Russian Forest

The main building of the holiday camp, half hidden from view
behind a screen of old poplars and cypresses, was an oppressive;
gray structure which seemed to have turned its back to the sea at
the bidding of some crazed fairy-tale conjuror. The facade; with its
columns, cracked stars and sheaves of wheat bent eternally before a
plaster wind, faced into a shallow courtyard where the smells of the
kitchen, the laundry, and the hairdresser’s mingled; the massive
wall which faced on to the shoreline had only two or three windows. A few meters froth the colonnade there was a high concrete
wall, beyond which the rays of the sunset glinted on the chimneys
of the local power plant. The tall, formal doors concealed in the
shade on the cyclopean balcony had been locked for so long that
even the crack between them had disappeared under several layers
of caked -paint, and the yard was usually empty, except when an
occasional lorry cautiously squeezed its way in, bringing milk and
bread from Feodosia.
This evening there wasn’t even a lorry in the yard, so there was
no one to notice the individual leaning on the molded balustrade of
the balcony, except perhaps for a pair of seagulls out on patrol, two
white specks drifting across the sky. The stranger was looking down
and to the right, towards the shelter on the dockside and the cone of
a loudspeaker lodged under the edge of its roof. The sea was noisy,
but when the wind blew towards the holiday camp, it carried audible snatches of a radio-message directed at the deserted beach.
‘. . . not at all the same as each other, not cut to the same pattern . . . created us all different; is not this part of the grand scheme

[3]

The Life of Insects

The individual in the cap pointed to his watch and waved his fist
at the fat newcomer, who shouted back at him: ‘It’s fast! It’s
always wrong.’
They moved closer and embraced.
‘Hi, Arnold,’ said the individual in the cap.
‘Hello, Arthur. Let me introduce you,’ the fat newcomer said,
turning to the foreigner. `This is Arthur, I told you about him. And
this is Samuel Sacker. He speaks Russian.’
`Just call me Sam,’ said the foreigner, extending his hand.
`Pleased to meet you,’ said Arthur. `How was your journey,
Sam? ‘
`Just fine, thank you,’ replied Sam. `How are things here?’
`The same as ever,’ said Arthur. `You know how things are in
Moscow, don’t you, Sam? Well it’s basically the same here, only a
bit more hemoglobin and glucose. And vitamins, too -the food’s
good here, lots of fruit and grapes.’
`And then,’ added Arnold, `from what we hear, in the West
you’re choking to death on all kinds of repellents and insecticides,
but our packaging is entirely pollution-free.’
`But is it hygienic?’
`Pardon?’
`Is it hygienic? You mean skin, don’t you?’ said Sam.
Arnold was clearly a little embarrassed.
`Well now,’ said Arthur; interrupting the awkward pause. `Will
you be with us for long?’
`About three or four days, I think,’ said Sam.
`Will that be Tong enough for you to do your market research?’
`I wouldn’t really call it “research”. I just want to gather a few
impressions, get some general idea of whether it would be worth
expanding our business here.’
`Great,’ said Arthur: `I’ve already lined up a few typical specimens I think first thing tomorrow morning . . .’
`Oh, no,’ said Sam, `no special Potemkin villages. I prefer to
move around at random - strangely enough, that’s the way you get
the most accurate impression of the real situation. And not tomor-

[5]

The Life of Insects

other sound, they heard someone snoring behind the netting.
Sam looked inquiringly at Arthur.
`There should be a hole here in he corner,’ said Arthur: `Our colleagues usually make one.’
The hole was a narrow gap between the frame and the netting.
Arthur and Sam squeezed through it without particular difficulty,
but Arnold had problems with his belly. He puffed and panted for
some time, and got through only when his companions pulled him
in after them.
It was dark inside, and the roam smelted of eau-de-cologne,
mould, and sweat. In the centre of the room stood a large table, covered with oilcloth. Beside it was abed and a small bedside table with
a neat row of small faceted eau-de-cologne bottles. Lying on the bed
in a tangled heap of sheets was a semi-naked body, with one blue
track suited leg dangling down to the floor. It was shuddering spasmodically in uneasy sleep and naturally did not notice the appearance of three mosquitoes on the small table not far from its head.
`What’s that tattoo he has?’ Sam asked softly, when his eyes
had adjusted to the semi-darkness. `I get the point of Lenin and
Stalin, but why’s he, got OKWIFIP written underneath them? Is it a
name?’
`No’ said Arthur, `it’s an abbreviation. Our Kids Will Fix the
Pigs.’
`He hates pigs?’
`Well now,’ Arnold explained condescendingly, `it’s a very complex cultural nexus. If I start explaining it now, we’ll just get
bogged dawn, quite literally. Let’s get on with taking the sample
now we’re here, while the subject is still asleep.’
`Yes, yes,’ said Sam, `absolutely.’
He soared up into the air, performed a magnificent loop- theloop above the sleeping figure, and landed on the stretch of thin,
tender skin by the ear.
`Arnold;’ Arthur whispered admiringly, `look at that . . . He
flies without making a sound.’
`That’s America for you,’ said Arnold. `You fly up and keep an

[9]

The Life of Insects

compare this place,’ he said, nodding in the direction of the ear
drooping down over the neck below him, `with Canada near the
Great Lakes. But everything here is closer to the wild state; all the
smells are natural . . .’ He prodded the base of a hair with one leg.
`We’ve already forgotten what the great mother-skin actually
smells like . . .’
From the intonation Sam used for these last few words; Arthur
realized he was showing off his knowledge of idiomatic Russian.
`In general,’ added Sam, `it’s the same difference as between
Japan and China.’
`Have you been to China as well?’ asked Arthur.
`A couple of times.’
`And Africa?’
`Lots of times.’
`How was it?’
`I can’t say I liked it very much: It’s like being on another planet. Everything’s black and murky. And then, don’t get me wrong,
I’m no racist, but the local mosquitoes . . .’
Arthur couldn’t think of anything else to ask, and Sam set to,
work with a polite smile. The way he went about it was unusual.
He bent back his side appendices, then his sharp proboscis began
vibrating with incredible speed, finally sinking into the ground at
the foot of the nearest hair like a knife cutting through salami.
Arthur was also intending to drink his fill, but when he thought
of the crunching sound his crude, thick nose would make breaking
through the stubborn surface of the skin, he felt ashamed and
decided to wait for a while. Sam managed to hit a capillary at his
first attempt, and his brown belly gradually began turning a reddish color. The surface beneath ‘their feet shuddered, and there was
a low mumbling exhalation. Arthur was sure the body was doing
this for its own internal reasons, unconnected with what was happening, but he still felt a little anxious.
`Sam,’ he said, `finish up now. This isn’t your Japan.’
Sam paid absolutely no attention to him. Arthur looked at him
and shuddered. Sam’s downy face, which only a minute ago had

[ 11 ]

The Life of Insects

`What forest?’
`Cypress sweetness,’ Sam replied incomprehensibly.
`Sam, are you all right?’ asked Arnold.
`Me?’ Sam chuckled ominously. `Sure I am. And we’re gonna
sort you out, too, believe it!’
`Let’s get him into the fresh air quick,’ Arthur said anxiously.
Arnold nodded and tried to lift Sam up, but Sam suddenly
slapped him in the face with his wing, soared into the air, and raced
over to the window. Slipping with incredible deftness through the
narrow gap between the window frame and the netting, he flew out
into the blue southern sky, which was already thickening into dusk.
‘The next morning was quiet. The fog creeping down from the
mountains flowed into the avenues lined with cypresses, so that
from high above it looked as though the surface, bisected by green
dams, hid bottomless depths – or, if there was a bottom to them, it
was very deep, The rare passers-by somehow seemed like fish,
swimming slowly, close to the surface! Their forms were blurred,
and Arthur and Arnold had already, flown down twice in vain, mistaking first a soaking-wet cardboard box a television had come in,
and then a small haystack covered with plastic sheeting, for Sam
Sacker.
`Maybe he got a lift to Feodosia,’ said Arthur, breaking the
silence.
`Maybe,’ said Arnold. `Maybe anything at all.’
`Look,’ said Arthur, `isn’t that him?’
`No,’ said Arnold, looking closely, `it’s not him. It’s a statue of
a volleyball player.’
`No, over there, by that kiosk. Coming out of the bushes.’
Arnold saw a large object that looked from a distance like a huge
ball of dung. The object tumbled out of the bushes, wobbling as it
rolled over to the bench and plunked itself down, stretching out
oddly thin legs in front of itself.
`Let’s land,’ said Arnold.
A minute later they emerged from behind the empty newspaper

[ 13 ]

The Life of Insects

some now-forgotten tragedy which he had read when he was still a
larva. Sam sank into silence, as though pondering what to say next.
`So why d’ you suck Russian blood, then?’ he asked stupidly,
about three minutes later.
`We get thirsty,’ Arthur replied plaintively. Arnold couldn’t see
him; his view was blocked by Sam’s protruding belly, which billowed like some lonely red sail in the sunset. Arnold felt insulted by
the humiliation in his colleague’s voice.
`What are you getting at, anyway?’ he asked caustically. `We
suck everybody’s blood: Don’t you do the same? Anyone who talks
like that dust wants to keep it all, down to the very last drop, for
himself. Look at that belly. Arthur and I wouldn’t drink that much
in a week.’
Sam let go of Arthur and set his palm against his huge quivering paunch.
`Arise, O vast and mighty land,’ he mumbled and struggled to
his feet, almost smearing Arnold across the bench with his hand. He
threw his head back and took several quick gulps of air, then hung
it forward, but instead of sneezing as this gesture might have suggested, he flooded the asphalt in front of him with a stream of dark
cherry-colored vomit smelling of blood and eau-de-cologne, and his
huge belly immediately shrank to half its size.
`Where am I?’ he asked looking around, his voice sounding a little more like the old Sam’s. `There’s nothing to be afraid of,’ said the half-crushed Arnold,
feeling the hand on his shoulder relaxing its pressure.
Sam shook his head and looked down at the huge bloody puddle
at his feet.
`What’s going on?’ he asked again.
`There’s been a technical error,’ said Arthur. `You got a damaged
specimen. Please don’t think that everyone here drinks “Russian Forest” cologne . . .’
At these words Sam’s eyes clouded over again, and he renewed
his grip on Arthur and Arnold.
`Come on,’ he said.

[ 15 ]

The Life of Insects

I’ll fly back there myself and check things out.’
`What an emotional whirlwind!’ said Sam. `What a torrent of
feelings! I was almost overwhelmed, believe me.’
Arthur and Arnold cautiously seated the thin, trembling figure
on the bench and sat down themselves on either side of it. Sam was
still shaking.
`Calm down, Sam,’ Arnold whispered in a motherly voice.
`Look how calm and peaceful everything is here. Look at the seagulls flying and the girls walking by. There’s a boat sailing past.
Beautiful, isn’t it?’
Sam raised his eyes. The first holidaymakers were already wandering along the concrete slabs through the fog. From the direction
of the seaside cafe he could hear two voices: a child’s voice asking
something unintelligible, and an authoritative bass, which gave an
equally unintelligible answer.
Out of the fog appeared a short man with a moustache, wearing
a tracksuit. Behind him plodded a boy carrying a plastic beach-bag
with something heavy inside. He caught up with the man and
began walking beside him, glancing sideways at Sam and his companions. The boy was wearing blue flip-flops, and he was dragging
his left foot, because one of the rubber straps was broken.

[ 17 ]

The Life of Insects

He handed the glasses to his son, who put them into his bag, and
they went on. The kiosk disappeared from view, and a small bridge
appeared in front of them. Beyond it, the fog was even thicker; the only
thing they could see clearly was the concrete beneath their feet. Off to
the sides, blurred strips of green drifted past them, looking like huge
blades of grass, or perhaps trees. Instead of the sky over their heads,
there was a low white vault of fog, and on their left they occasionally
saw empty concrete planters with ribbed sides, which widened towards
the top so that they resembled corks from bottles of wine turned upside
down.
`Pa,’ asked the boy, `what’s fog made of?’ His father thought for a
moment.
`Fog,’ he said, holding out several small clumps of dung to his son,
`is extremely fine droplets of water hanging in the air.’
`Then why don’t they fall down?’
His father pondered and held out another clump to his son.
`Because they are very small,’ he said.
Once again, the boy didn’t see where his father was getting the
dung from and he glanced around him as though he were trying to
make out the tiny droplets.
`We won’t get lost, will we?’ he asked anxiously. `It doesn’t look as
though there’s going to be any beach.’
His father didn’t answer. He walked on through the fog without
speaking, and there was nothing for the boy to do but follow. The boy
felt as though he and his father were crawling along at the foot of the
biggest Christmas tree in the world, moving through immense mounds
of cotton-wool meant to look like snow, not really knowing where
they were going, and his father was only pretending to know the way.
`Pa, where are we going? We just keep on walking and walking . . .’
`What?’ `I just . . .’
The boy looked up and saw a dim glimmer off to one side. In the
murk he couldn’t see where it was coming from, or what it was that
was shining. Perhaps it was part of the fog gleaming with a blue light
right beside him, or perhaps he beam of a searchlight switched on by

[ 19 ]

The Life of Insects

`From now on you won’t be able to carry all your dung. From now
on you’ll have your own Ai, just like me and your mother.’
`My own Ai?’ asked the boy. `But what’s an Ai?’ `See for yourself.’
The boy looked at his father closely and suddenly saw beside him a
large semi-transparent, blue-brown sphere. `What’s that?’ he asked,
frightened.
`That’s my Ai,’ said his father: `And now you’ll have one just like
it.’
`But why didn’t I see it before?’
`You were too young. But now you’re old enough to see the sacred
sphere fox yourself.’
`But why does it flicker and fade like that? What’s it made of?’
`You think it’s flickering because you’re seeing it for the first time.
When you get used to it, you’ll understand it’s more real than anything else in the world. And it’s made of pure dung.’
`Aah,’ said the boy slowly, `so that’s where you were getting all the
dung from. You just kept on giving it to me, and I couldn’t tell where
you were getting it from. But now it turns out you’ve got all that.
What was that word you said?’
`Ai. It’s a sacred Egyptian syllable that dung-beetles have used for
thousands of years as the name for their spheres,’ his father said
solemnly. `Your Ai is still small, but it will gradually get bigger and
bigger. Your mother and I will give you, some of the dung, and then
you’ll learn to find it fox yourself.’
The boy was still squatting there, looking up at his father doubtfully. His father smiled and smacked his lips.
`But where will I find the dung?’ the boy asked.
`All around,’ said his father, and gestured into the fog with his
hand.
`But there isn’t any dung there, Pa.’
`On the contrary, there’s nothing but dung’
`I don’t understand,’ said the boy.
`Hold this. Now you’ll be able to understand. Everything around
you becomes dung once you have an Ai. And then you’ll have the
whole world in your hands. And you’ll push it along in front of you.’

[ 21 ]

The Life of Insects

His father nodded again.
`But how can I see this ball from the inside arid push it along at the
same time?’
`I don’t know that myself,’ his father shrugged. `When you grow
up, you can become a philosopher and explain it to the rest of us.’
`All right,’ said the boy, `if there isn’t anything except dung, then
who am I? I’m not made of dung, am I?’
`I’ll try to explain,’ said his father, pushing his hands into his sphere
and passing one more handful to his son. ``That’s right, that’s the
way, with open hands . . . Now take a close look at your own sphere.
It is you.’
`That can’t be right! I’m here.’ said the boy, pointing to himself
with his thumb.
`You’re thinking about it the wrong way. Try logical reasoning. ‘If
you call something Ai, then it means it’s you. Your Ai is you.’
`My you is Ai?’ asked the boy. `Or your you?’
`No,’ said his father. `Your Ai is you. Sit down on the bench and
calm down, and hen you’ll see it all for yourself.’
What the father called a bench was a long, thick beam with a square
cross-section, lying at the edge of their limited field of vision. One end
of it had been badly burned - it had obviously been caught by the
flames from a rubbish bin someone had set alight - and now the bench
looked like a match enlarged many times over. The boy rolled his Ai
over to the bench, sat down, and looked at his father.
`Won’t the fog make it hard to see?’ he asked.
`No,’ said his father. `Look, you can almost see y our Ai now. Only
don’t look anywhere else.’
The boy looked at his father, shrugged sceptically, and stared at the
uneven surface of his own newly moulded sphere. As he gazed at it, it
gradually became smoother, and even began to, gleam. Then it started
to turn transparent, and inside it he could see something moving. The
boy shuddered.
From deep inside the sphere he was being watched by a spiky black
head with tiny eyes and powerful jaws. The creature had no neck; its
head was connected directly to a hard black shell, with two rows of ser-

[ 23 ]

The Life of Insects

for a moment at the highest point of noon, and was hurled downwards
by the motion of the sphere rolling across the concrete. As he fell, he
realized that the sphere would roll over him, but there was no time to
feel frightened. Darkness fell, and when the boy came to his senses, he
found he was being hoisted upwards by the same hemisphere of dung
that had just flattened him against the pavement.
`Good morning!’ he heard his father’s voice say. `How did you
sleep?’
`What’s happening, Pa?’ the boy asked, fighting against his dizziness.
`It’s just life, son,’ said his father.
Glancing to one side, the boy saw a grey-brown sphere rolling
through the murk. His father was nowhere to be seen, but when he
looked closer, the boy could make out a blurred, indistinct silhouette on
the surface of the dung, rotating with the movement of the sphere. The
silhouette had a vague trunk, arms, legs, and even two eyes, which
were gazing simultaneously into the sphere and out from it. The eyes
looked at the boy sadly.
`Don’t say it, son, don’t say it. Ai know what you’re going to ask.
Yes, This happens to everyone. It’s just that we scarabs are the only
ones who can see it.’
`Pa,’ asked the little sphere, `why did Ai use to think that you were
walking behind your ball of dung and pushing it along?’
`That was because you were still a little boy, son.’
`And is all of life like this, smashing your face against the concrete
. . .’
`But life is fine and beautiful anyway,’ said his father, in a slightly
threatening tone. `Good night.’
The boy glanced ahead and saw the concrete slab advancing towards
his eyes.
“Good morning!’ said the big sphere, when the darkness had dissipated once again. `How are you feeling?’
`Not good,’ the boy answered.
`Well, try harder to feel good. You’re young and healthy what have
you got to feel sad about? Either . . .’

[ 27 ]

The Life of Insects

`Ai’m here,’ answered a voice from the fog. `Good night!’
`Good night!’
`Good morning!’
`Good morning!’ shouted the big sphere, and set off after the
answering voice, and he rolled for quite a long time before he realized
that he and his son had missed each other.
`Hey !’ he shouted again. `Where are you?’
`Ai’m here.’
This time the voice came from a long way off, to his left. The big
sphere was just about to move in that direction, but he suddenly froze
in fright. Ahead of him he heard a thunderously loud blow, so powerful that the concrete beneath him shuddered slightly. The next blow
was closer, and the dung sphere saw a huge red shoe with a stiletto heel
stabbing down into the concrete a few metres ahead.
`Pa! Now Ai can hear footsteps, too! What is it?’ he heard his son
ask from far away.
`Son!’ his father cried out despairingly.
`Pa!’
The boy cried out in terror and looked up. He glimpsed a shadow
over his head, and for a moment he thought he saw a red shoe with a
dark spot on the sole rising up into the sky, and then he thought that
up in those ineffable heights into which the shoe had vanished, the silhouette of an immense bird with its wings spread had appeared. With
a struggle, the boy freed his hands from the sphere of dung and rushed
over to where he had last heard his father’s voice. After a few steps he
came across a large black spot on the asphalt, and he slipped on it and
almost fell.
`Pa,’ he said gently.
Seeing what was left of his father was too painful, and he wandered
back to his sphere, gradually absorbing what had happened. He
remembered his father’s kind face with the chitinous horns that
weren’t nearly as fearsome as they looked, and the beady eyes filled
with love, and he began to cry. Then he remembered how his pa would
hold out a piece of dung and say that tears did nothing to ease grief,
and he stopped crying.

[ 29 ]

The Life of Insects

The first object she encountered in this new world was a large plywood board with pictures of the Soviet future that never was and of the
fine, beautiful people who lived in it. Marina peered intently for a
minute at their faded Slavic faces, above which space stations were suspended in infinity, and then she turned her attention to the poster
which covered half of the advertising hoarding. It was handwritten
with a broad marker pen on cheap newsprint:
THE ALIENS AMONG US
A lecture on flying saucers and their pilots. New facts.
A display of photographs. The lecture will be followed by
A SESSION OF HYPNOTIC HEALING
All welcome.
The lecture and the session o f hypnosis will be conducted by the prize-winning member o
f the Voronezh Psychics Congress,
A. U. Spiderov, PhD Technical Science.

The last wisps of fog were trembling in the bushes behind the
poster, but the sky overhead had cleared and the sun was shining with
all its might. At the end of the promenade there was a bridge over an
open drain that ran into the sea, and Marina could hear music coming
from a kiosk beyond it, just the right kind of music for a sunny morning on the beach. To Marina's right, on a bench in front of the public
showers, an old man with a thick mane of yellowish-grey hair was
dozing, and a little distance to her left, beside a set of weighing-scales
that looked like a small gallows, a woman in a white nurse's coat waited for customers.
Marina heard a rustling of wings, and when she raised her head she
saw two female ants descending, repeating the same manoeuvres she
had performed a few minutes earlier. They had bags exactly like Marina's hanging over their shoulders, and they were dressed exactly the
same way, in denim skirts, blouses from co-operative workshops, and
red shoes with stiletto heels. The one flying in front and slightly lower
swooped over the barrier of the promenade and hurtled out over the
sea, regaining height as she went. The second was about to land, then

[ 33 ]

The Life of Insects

protrusions beside her shoulder-blades and the holes in her blouse.
Marina shoved the file back into her handbag, and the feeling of joyful
peace returned. She darted out of the bushes on to the light-drenched
promenade.
The world around her was beautiful. But what exactly made it so
beautiful was hard to say. The objects that furnished this world - the
trees, the benches, the clouds, the passers-by - none of them seemed to
be special in any way, but together they offered a clear promise of happiness, promised for no apparent reason at all. Marina heard a question
spoken within herself, not in words, but its meaning was nevertheless
very clear: 'What do you want, Marina?'
Marina thought for a moment and gave a cunning answer, also not
in words, but she put into it all the stubborn hope of her young organism.
'That's the way life is!' she whispered, drawing the air that smelled
of the sea deep into her lungs, and she set off along the promenade to
meet the bright day ahead. Just as she was thinking that she ought to
do something to amuse herself, she spotted an arrow nailed to a tree,
with the words:
SIFLIT CO-OPERATIVE
Videobar with continuous showing
of French feature films

The arrow pointed towards a path leading to a grey building behind
the trees, and Marina decided to follow it.
The videobar proved to be a musty basement with paint crudely
slapped on the walls, empty cigarette packs on the bar, and a flickering
screen in one corner. As soon as she stepped inside, Marina was stopped
by a rotund man in a tracksuit who demanded an entrance fee of two
roubles sixty kopecks. Marina groped in her handbag for a small purse
made of black imitation leather. In the purse she found two crumpled
one-rouble notes and three twenty-kopeck pieces. She tipped them into
the muscular palm, which grasped the money with three fingers and
pointed with a fourth to one of the tables.
Most of those around her were recently landed girls in blouses with

[ 35 ]

The Life of Insects

she was out on the street again. She came to her senses only when the
sun blinded her eyes, and she hurried into the shade of an avenue of
cypresses, measuring her favourite scenes from the film against her
own life.
There she is lying in bed, wearing a yellow silk dressing gown, and
on the bedside table beside her stands a basket of flowers. The telephone
rings. Marina picks up the receiver and hears the fleshy-faced man's
voice: 'It's me. We parted only five minutes ago, but you said I could
call you any time.'
'I'd already gone to sleep,' Marina says in a throaty voice.
'At this time of night there are hundreds of things to do in Paris,'
says the man.
'All right,' says Marina. 'But make it something original.'
Or: Marina (wearing slim sunglasses) is locking her car, and the
fleshy-faced man has stopped beside her and is making subtle comments on architecture. Marina raises her eyes and looks at him with
cold curiosity: 'Do we know each other?'
'No,' says the man, 'but we would, if we were living in the same
hotel room . . .'
Suddenly Marina forgot the film and stopped dead.
'Where am I going?' she thought, perplexed, and looked around her.
Ahead of her was a solitary white five-storey apartment building
with balconies wreathed in ivy. In front of the building was a dusty
vacant lot, criss-crossed with tyre-tracks, and on the edge of the lot
stood a smelly white wattle and daub roadside toilet. She could also see
a deserted bus stop and several blank stone walls. Marina felt with
absolute certainty that she should not go on in that direction, but she
looked around and realized she had no reason to go back either.
'I have to do something,' she thought. Something very much like
amputating the wings - it seemed as though she had remembered what
it was just a moment ago. She'd even walked along the lane with a
vague awareness of where she was going and why, but now she'd completely forgotten. Marina felt the same yearning she'd felt on the promenade.
'If we were living in the same hotel room,' she muttered, 'in the same

[ 37 ]

The Life of Insects

that the skirt she had used as a sack the night before was nowhere to
be seen - she must have left it by the road with the final load of earth.
Marina had no shoes on her feet either; she remembered she had taken
them off when they began to get in her way. She could not go out looking like that. Marina sat on the earth floor and cried until she fell asleep
again.
When she woke up, it was dark. Something in her had changed
while she slept, and she no longer thought about whether she could or
couldn't go out looking as she did. She simply groped in the darkness
for the trowel, pushed aside the cardboard, climbed out, sat down, and
raised her eyes to the sky.
Night in the Crimea is astonishingly beautiful. As the sky darkens,
it rises away from the earth and the stars are clear and bright. The
Crimea is imperceptibly transformed from the spa of the Soviet Union
into a Roman province, and your heart is filled with the inexpressibly
familiar feelings of all those who have ever stood on its ancient roads
at night, listening to the song of the cicadas and gazing up at the sky
without thinking. The straight, narrow cypresses seem like columns
left behind from buildings demolished long ago; the sea murmurs in
exactly the same way it always has; and before you roll your sphere of
dung onwards, you sense for a moment just how mysterious and
incomprehensible life is, and how tiny a part of what life could be we
actually call by that name.
Marina looked down and shook her head in an attempt to gather
her thoughts. Finally she realized that she had to go to the market and
see what she could find there.
She slowly approached the dark cliff-face of the holiday-camp
building, lifting her feet high to avoid stumbling. She could see almost
nothing, and for all her caution, her foot got caught in a hole and she
fell, nearly spraining her ankle. The pain cleared her head, and Marina
realized it would be much easier and safer to crawl. She went on like
that until she came across a lighted pathway planted with flowers, and
then she galloped towards the lights on the promenade, moving on
three limbs, with one hand grasping the trowel, notched and scratched
from its long and heavy duty.

[ 41 ]

The Life of Insects

she stopped a few metres short of it, thought for a moment, then went
back and picked up the box which the ugly bitch had dropped.
'How horrible she looked!' she thought with loathing. Marina piled
the food in the corner of the burrow, then crawled out again, this time
towards the holiday camp building. She was in a very good mood.
'Yes, that's the way life is,' she whispered, peering ahead into the
darkness.
Finally she found what she was looking for. On the lawn there was
the small pile of straw covered with plastic sheeting that Marina had
noticed on the very first day. In a few trips she had dragged all the
straw over to her burrow, and then, astonished and delighted at her
own bravery, she stole up to the wall of the building and then slowly
along it, crouching as she passed the windows. One of them was open,
and from inside she could hear the loud breathing of people asleep.
Marina turned her head away in order not to catch sight of her reflection in the window, leaped up, and with a single graceful gesture tore
down the curtain hanging at the window, and then dashed back to her
burrow without looking back.

[ 43 ]

The Life of Insects

he realized he’d left the cocoon, he’d begun to look rather strange in the
dark. The heavy wings folded behind his back looked liked a cloak of silver brocade stretching almost down to the ground, and Mitya sometimes wondered how others perceived them.
Behind the bright curtains of the next house, people were playing
cards and talking. A married couple lived there, and judging from the
voices, today they had guests.
‘Hearts it is,’ said a man’s voice. ‘Of course, Oxana, life has changed.
You keep on asking, but really everything’s different now that we live
together.’
‘But are things better or worse?’ asked an insistent woman’s voice.
‘Well . . . Now I have responsibilities,’ the man’s voice answered
thoughtfully. ‘I know where I have to go after work. And there’s a
child, you know . . . I’m playing blind.’
‘You’re already down to minus four hundred,’ another male voice
broke in.
‘So what can I do about it?’ asked the first voice. ‘Six of hearts.’
Mitya lit a cigarette - several small insects came hurtling towards
the flame of his lighter - went out through the gate and jumped across
the dry bed of the stream. He walked carefully through the darkness for
several metres, scrambled past the bushes and out on to the asphalt,
then stopped and looked back. The bright line of the road climbed until
it broke off at the top of the hill, and beyond that he could see the dark
silhouettes of the mountains. From the sea, one of them, the mountain
on the right, looked like a huge eagle clad in armour with its head bent
forwards. From the launch that went by in the evenings, you could
sometimes see mysterious lights on the summit. There was probably a
lighthouse up there, but no lights were visible at the moment.
Mitya took a few more drags on his cigarette, dropped the butt on
the asphalt, crushed it thoroughly, and began running slowly along the
road. After a few steps he was caught in a current of air and carried up
through the treetops. He drew in his Legs to avoid snagging the electricity cable stretched between two poles, and when there was nothing
left above him but the clear dark sky, he began making wide circles to
gain height. Soon it became cooler, and his back began to ache with

[ 45 ]

The Life of Insects

much like life all this was, but his satisfaction at his own detachment
was clouded by an awareness that for some reason he was also sitting
there on the same bench as all the others, gazing at the dancers’ sweaty
faces.
Suddenly the music grew louder; the lights went out and then
began flashing in turn, snatching frozen figures out of the darkness for
a split second, now green, now blue, now red, and in the brief moments
of its existence, the crowd resembled a cluster of plaster statues transported here from all the Gorky Parks and Young Pioneer camps in the
country. Several minutes went by like this, and then it became clear
that really there was no dance, and no dance floor, arid no dancers.
There was nothing but a multitude of dead Gorky Parks, each of which
existed for only a split second while the lamp was lit before disappearing, to be replaced by another Gorky Park equally lifeless and
deserted, differing only in the colour of its temporary sky and the
angles at which the statues’ limbs were bent.
Mitya stood up, pushed his way through the cheerfully buzzing
girls in blue and green dresses, and went out through the gates, where
several musclemen were sitting in menacing, bright-coloured tracksuits. Through a gap in the trees he could see the dim purple glow of a
streetlamp. It flared up, flickered a few times, and then went out; acting on a sudden impulse, Mitya set off into the darkness in that direction.
Soon passing the trees that concealed the sky, he came upon a tarnished green bust of Chekhov gazing thoughtfully at him out of the
bushes, with the shards of a broken vodka bottle gleaming beside it in
the moonlight. The sounds of cheerful voices and quiet tapping came
from a group of people sitting under one of the dim streetlamps, playing dominoes and drinking beer. Mitya thought he really should go for
a swim, and he walked along a string of benches which offered its inviting feminine curve to the sea.
‘We’ll see who’s the stranger here! Ugly bitch!’ he heard a woman’s
voice shouting from the direction of the market. Mitya lit a cigarette
and saw a dark figure up ahead, leaning
on the parapet. He looked at its long silvery cloak and shook his

[ 47 ]

The Life of Insects

fly towards? There was this verse, listen: “No regrets have I for life’s
anguished breathing, for what are life and death? But I regret that light
that shone above the universe, and now weeps in the night as it
recedes” . . .’
‘I don’t think you ought to feel sorry for that light. It would be
more appropriate for that light to feel sorry for you. Or do you think
you yourself are the light that weeps in the darkness?’
‘Perhaps I do.’
‘Then don’t go into the darkness,’ said Dima. ‘No one’s forcing
you.’
A new song started up from the dance floor - a woman sadly asking the dark sky, the moon, and two dark figures wandering along a
beach where she was today, and complaining that she did not know
where to find either herself or anyone else; the last line was inaudible,
but that wasn’t important, because it wasn’t the words that mattered,
or even the music, but something else - the fact that everything around
them was meditating in infinite sadness on where it was today, and
how it could possibly find either itself or anyone else.
‘Like it?’ asked Mitya.
‘Not bad,’ said Dima. ‘The best thing is that she doesn’t understand
what she’s singing about. Just like your friend who couldn’t find anything better to do than to feel sorry for the light receding into the darkness.’
‘He’s not my friend,’ said Mitya.
‘Good,’ said Dima. ‘I wouldn’t want to have anything to do with
someone like that, either. You know, everything that rouses the pity of
the dead is based on a very simple mechanism. For instance, if you
show a dead man a fly stuck on flypaper with music playing, and you
make him think for a second that this fly is him, then he’ll immediately burst into tears out of compassion for his fellow corpse.’
‘So that means I’m dead, too?’ asked Mitya.
‘Of course,’ said Dima. ‘You must be. But at least I can explain it to
you, and that means you’re not completely dead.’
They went back up on to the promenade. The domino -players had
disappeared, and all that was left of them was a newspaper fluttering

[ 51 ]

The Life of Insects

‘What d’you mean? It comes from the moon.’
‘Yes? Did you never have the idea that the moon is actually totally
black?’
‘I think I’d call it yellowish-white,’ said Mitya, looking up attentively. ‘Or slightly bluish.’
‘All right. Of course, five billion flies will agree with you. But you’re
not a fly. The fact that you see a yellow spot when you look at the
moon doesn’t actually mean that it is yellow. I can’t see why nobody
can understand that. The answer to all your questions is hanging right
there over your head.’
‘Perhaps,’ said Mitya. ‘Unfortunately, none of these questions arise
for me. But I understand what you’re saying. You’re trying to tell me
that when I look at the moon I see the light of the sun which it reflects,
but it doesn’t shine itself. I don’t think that’s important - it’s enough
for me that the light exists. And when I see it, the most important part
of me makes me move towards the light. Where it comes from, or what
kind of light it is, is not particularly important.’
‘All right. You don’t want to fly towards the moon. What light are
you moving towards at present?’
‘The nearest streetlamp.’
‘And then where?’
‘The next one.’
Dima stretched out his hand, made a movement as though he was
turning an invisible switch, and suddenly, all the lamps on the promenade went out. Mitya stopped.
‘What light are you moving towards now?’ Dima asked.
‘That’s some trick. How did you do it?’
‘Just the way you were thinking,’ said Dima. ‘I arranged for an
electrician to sit in the bushes and wait for my signal. And all just to
make an impression on you.’
‘Is that what I was thinking?’
‘Weren’t you?’
‘More or less. I did think about the electrician and the sign, but not
about the bushes. Will you tell me how you do it?’
‘What? How I read minds?’

[ 53 ]

5 The Third Rome

The tiny hang-glider hurtled past so close to the jagged rocks protruding from the mountainside that for an instant it almost merged with
its own shadow, and everyone at the tables in the open-air cafe gasped
loudly in unison. Slipping through the sky like a silvery moth, the triangle swerved away at the last moment and flew out over the sea
towards the beach. Sam applauded, and Arthur looked round at him.
‘Do you find it that impressive?’ he asked.
‘In my younger days,’ said Sam, ‘I used to do something similar, so
I can appreciate another person’s skill. I would never have gone that
close to the cliff.’
‘I just can’t understand the point of risking your life so senselessly,’
said Arthur.
‘If you think about it, you and I also risk our lives every day,’ said
Sam.
‘Yes, but you know quite well that’s because we have to. I wouldn’t like to splatter my brains against a cliff.’
‘True enough,’ said Sam, following the movements of the triangle
thoughtfully as it turned back towards the jagged rocks. ‘True enough.
Where do they start from?’
‘That hill over there,’ said Arthur. ‘See it?’
Far beyond the beach and the village there was a low mountain,
long and flat, and on its peak they could make out several colourful
hang-gliders. Sam took out a small brown notebook and jotted something down, making a rough sketch of the beach, the village and the
low mountain.
‘There’s always an upcurrent there,’ said Arthur. ‘That’s why
they’re so fond of it.’

[ 55 ]

The Life of Insects

slightly.
‘How are you?’ she asked in English, enunciating the words
painstakingly. ‘I’m Natasha. And what is your name?’
‘Sam Sacker,’ answered Sam. ‘But we can talk Russian.’
Natasha smiled, displaying her even white teeth, looked over at
Arthur’s scornful face, and was instantly gloomy again.
‘Am I bothering you?’ she asked, and shifted on her chair as though
she was about to get up.
‘Well, how can I put it?’ hissed Arthur, looking away.
‘Not at all,’ Sam cut in quickly. ‘How could such an enchanting
being possibly bother anyone? Champagne?’
‘With pleasure,’ Natasha replied, and she grasped the glass proffered
by Sam between her finger and thumb.
‘Do you live here?’ Sam asked.
Natasha took a sip of champagne and nodded.
‘Were you born here?’
‘No,’ said Natasha. ‘I was born very far away, in the north.’
‘What do you do?’
‘I play music,’ answered Natasha. She put her glass on the table and
moved her hands and arms as though stretching a chest expander.
‘Yes?’ said Sam, moving his eyes from the two mounds under the
gleaming green cloth of Natasha’s dress to the cheap silver bracelet
between her sucker and her wrist. ‘I’d like to hear you play some time.’
‘Excuse me,’ said Arthur. ‘Do you mind if I go and make a phonecall? Arnold’s been gone a long time.’
Sam nodded, and Arthur went over to the phone-booth squeezed in
between two kiosks. There was a queue for the phone. Arthur took his
place and began looking over the books laid out on the lawn by the
street traders.
Natasha opened the handbag lying on her knees, took out a small
file, looked at it in astonishment, tossed it back, and fished out some
make-up. ‘Where are you from, Sam?’ she asked, looking at herself in
the mirror. ‘Are you American?’
‘Yes,’ answered Sam. ‘But it’s hard to say where I live - I spend most

[ 57 ]

The Life of Insects

‘Me, joking? You come here to drink blood, you bastard, and you
think we’re going to waste our time on jokes?’
‘Who’s “we”?’ asked Sam.
‘I’ll tell you,’ said Arnold, getting up from his chair. There’s no way
of knowing what would have happened next, if Arthur hadn’t run up
and smashed the champagne bottle over his head.
Arnold tumbled to the ground and lay there without moving. Conversation at the nearby tables stopped, and several people rose from
their seats, preparing either to get involved or run away. Arthur quickly sat astride his colleague and tried to pull his arms behind his back,
which proved not to be so easy, even though Arnold didn’t appear to
offer any resistance.
‘I knew he wouldn’t be able to resist it,’ Arthur muttered nervously. ‘I knew he’d have to try it. And he said you were psychologically
unstable. You go, before he comes to his senses. Take the girl with you.
And I . . .’
Arnold stirred, and Arthur almost fell off on to the asphalt.
‘Let’s go, Natasha,’ said Sam, taking her by the arm.
They quickly got up from the table and walked away, passing a
militiaman running towards the scene of the fight.
‘What’s wrong with him? Drugs?’ asked Natasha.
‘Something like that,’ answered Sam. ‘I don’t like discussing other
people’s misfortunes. Do you know anywhere we can get a bite to eat?
We never did get anything here.’
Natasha looked back at the crowd packed in between the tables at
the restaurant.
‘It’s over,’ she said, ‘they’ve got cuffs on the jerk. What were you
saying? Somewhere to eat? There’s a place down by the sea; we have to
take a taxi.’
‘I’m sorry, Natasha,’ said Sam. ‘Maybe you have other plans?’
Natasha’s answer was to glance at Sam with a simple-hearted
frankness that instantly made all her plans quite obvious.
The road they were walking along ran past a deep foundation pit
with the ruins of an unfinished building. Grass, bushes, and even

[ 59 ]

The Life of Insects

cheeks flushed red, as though he’d just come out of the bath-house. He
pulled his lips out of the seat, straightened up, and smiled at Natasha.
Natasha maintained a studied silence.
‘Natasha, have I offended you?’ Sam asked.
‘How?’ she asked in surprise.
‘With this Third World.’
‘Of course not, Sam. It’s just that I had my fortune told when I was
a child, and they told me to beware of the Roman numeral III. But I’m
not afraid of it the least little bit. And I’ve no reason to be offended. I’m
not Russia. I’m Natasha.’
‘Natasha,’ said Sam, ‘is a lovely name.’
There were vineyards running along both sides of the road. When
they came to an end, the sea appeared on the left. Sam took a small
glass jar from his briefcase, spat some red liquid into it, then screwed
on the lid and tossed it back into the case. Natasha was deep in thought,
and a lovely curving wrinkle appeared on her forehead. Sam caught her
eye and smiled. ‘Everything okay?’ he asked.
‘Uhn huh,’ said Natasha with a smile. ‘I was just thinking. If the
first world is America, Japan, and Europe, and the Third Rome, I mean
Third World, is us, Africa, and Poland, then where’s the second world?’
‘The second world?’ Sam asked in surprise. ‘I don’t know. That’s an
interesting question. I must find out where the expression comes from.
There probably isn’t any second world.’
He glanced out of the window and noticed a silver triangle high up
in the sky. It could have been the same hang-glider he’d watched from
the restaurant, or another just like it.
‘There’s something else I don’t understand,’ he said. ‘Where are we
going?’
‘To get some lunch,’ said Natasha.
‘I’m still full,’ said Sam.
‘Then maybe we should pull up here?’ Natasha suggested. ‘It’s very
wild and beautiful. We can go for a swim.’
Sam gulped. ‘Listen,’ he said to the driver, ‘I think we’ll get out here,
okay?’
‘It’s up to you,’ said the driver morosely. ‘Just give me the five dol-

[ 63 ]

The Life of Insects

the tremor that ran down Natasha’s back made Sam forget all about
the rules of correct behaviour recommended by the magazine, and
when Natasha stepped out of her dress and stood there in a minuscule
bathing-suit of glittering green, his hands reached out for the camera
of their own accord.
He spent a long time filming Natasha’s thin childlike body, her
happy smile, and her hair waving in the wind. He took shots of her
head on the surface of the emerald water and her wet footprints on the
rock. Then he gave Natasha the camera and explained what to press,
dived into the water and set off at speed towards the white spot of a
tourist launch that had appeared in the distance, swimming with a butterfly stroke so reckless he almost seemed to be trying to overtake it.
When he came back to the rock, breathing heavily, Natasha was
lying on her back, shielding her eyes from the sun. Sam settled himself
beside her, set his cheek against the stone’s warm surface, and screwed
up his eyes as he looked at her.
‘When I get home,’ he said, ‘I’ll watch all this on TV and feel sad.’
‘Sam,’ said Natasha, ‘I know you’ve been to Rome. Have you been
to France, too?’
‘Yes, just recently,’ said Sam, moving closer. ‘Why do you ask?’
‘Oh,’ said Natasha, ‘my mother was always talking about France.
What were you doing there?’
‘The usual thing, sucking blood.’
‘That’s not what I meant. Did you go just because you felt like it?’
‘Not exactly. Some friends invited me to the annual Proust festival
in Combres.’
‘What kind of festival is that?’
Sam didn’t answer for a long time, and Natasha decided he couldn’t
be bothered. They heard the throbbing motor of the tourist launch, and
then closer at hand a few chords on a guitar, followed by a soft
buzzing, and Natasha felt a faint prick on her leg. She automatically
slapped the spot with her open hand, and something squashed wetly
under her fingers.
Sam suddenly began speaking in a sing-song voice, pronouncing
some sounds with a twang through his nose: ‘Imagine a small village

[ 65 ]

6 A Life for the Tsar

It was hard to tell how many days Marina spent deepening her burrow
and digging the second chamber. Days exist only where the sun rises
and sets, but Marina lived and worked in total darkness. At first she had
to grope her way around, but after a while she noticed that she could
see quite well in the dark. She realized it quite unexpectedly, after the
big bed of straw was laid out in the main chamber and covered with
the stolen curtain. Marina was just thinking there should be a basket
of flowers standing beside the bed, like in the film, when she noticed the
plywood box she had collected, standing in the corner. She looked
around and realized she could see everything else too - the bed, the
recess in the floor where she had stored the food from the market, and
her own limbs. It was all colourless and slightly blurred, but distinctly
visible.
‘Probably I could see in the dark before, but I just didn’t notice,’
thought Marina.
She picked up the box and placed it beside the bed, stuck a clump of
straw into it and made it look as much like a bouquet as she could. She
went over to the opposite wall of the chamber and looked at the interior with approval, then went back to bed and dived under the curtain.
Something was missing. Marina struggled with her thoughts for a
few minutes until she understood what it was, then pulled the handbag towards her, took out the slim sunglasses, and stuck them on her
nose. All she had to do now was wait for the telephone to ring. There
was no telephone in Marina’s burrow, but she knew that the call would
still come one way or another, because on that distant sunny morning
on the promenade life had given her its word of honour.
Marina was warm and comfortable under the curtain, but it was a

[ 67 ]

The Life of Insects

caved in.
A boot appeared in the new hole. It kicked at the earth several times,
widening the entrance, then disappeared, and suddenly a fleshy face
emerged. Marina recognised it immediately: it was him, or almost him,
only his hair wasn’t brown, it was ginger, and instead of a sheepskin
coat he was wearing a military greatcoat dusted with snow and revealing a major’s lapels. Carefully, so he wouldn’t get dirt on himself, he
squeezed his way through the hole, and Marina saw he had a heavy
black accordion-case hanging on his chest.
‘Good day to you,’ said the major. He took off his accordion, set the
safety catch, and put it on the floor. ‘Are you bored here?’
Marina’s stomach was tied in knots, but she found the strength to
raise her sunglasses elegantly and glance at the major with cool interest.
‘Are we acquainted?’ she asked.
‘We will be in a minute,’ said the major, walking up to the bed and
grasping in his strong hands the edge of the curtain hanging down
from the pile of straw.
‘You just can’t imagine, Nikolai, what vicious beasts there are out
there,’ Marina said, snuggling up against the cold shaggy form lying
beside her. ‘Just recently I went to the market to get some food and I
nearly got killed. I don’t know how I managed to get home afterwards.
Nikolai, are you asleep?’
Nikolai didn’t answer, and Marina turned over on to her back and
gazed up at the ceiling. She felt sleepy. Soon the ceiling seemed to disappear, and the stars began to shine overhead. One of the stars blinked
and began creeping across the ceiling. Remembering the faces of the
children on the poster with the images of a faded future, Marina made
a wish.
‘I’m a military man,’ Nikolai was saying, ‘a major. I live and work
in the city of Magadan. But the most important thing in my life is
music, so if you like music, we are sure to become very close . . .’
Marina opened her eyes. It was dark, as usual, but she knew the

[ 69 ]

The Life of Insects

his friends, ginger-haired majors just like himself, and from the moist
inviting look in their eyes she realized that she was making an impression.
An old general with mandibles worn down by age stopped close to
Marina and glanced at her with a benevolent smile. Marina thought she
should talk to him about culture.
‘Please tell me,’ she said. ‘Do you like French films?’
‘No,’ the general replied with military terseness. ‘I don’t like French
films. I like the films of Sergei Solovyev, especially the part where they
hit him on the head with a brick and he falls off his stool on to the
floor.’
At this point Marina realized that what she had taken for a benevolent smile was actually the result of paralysis of the facial muscles,
and the general’s look was not one of benevolence at all, but more one
of fear.
‘Your husband,’ added the general, with a sideways glance at Nikolai, ‘is a good officer with good prospects.’
‘I serve the Magadan Anthill!’ Nikolai responded, drawing himself
to attention and pinching Marina’s leg so that she wouldn’t think of
saying anything else.
The bell rang, and they crowded into the auditorium. Nikolai and Marina did not have very good seats and were looking on to the stage from a
distant angle. They couldn’t make out what was happening at the back,
and when the performance began, Marina just couldn’t work out what it
was about. Nikolai leaned over to her and began to explain in a whisper
that the big black ants had attacked the red ants’ anthill, and one old ant
who had promised to lead them to the chamber where the queen lay with
her eggs actually led them into an ant-lion’s tunnel. People began shushing
at Nikolai, and he stopped, but now Marina knew what was going on.
She could hear most of the action, but when the climax came and the
old ant and the ant-lion were left alone on the stage, Marina had a good
view. The ant-lion was a ruddy-faced individual with a shaved head, wearing the military uniform of the twenties with a medal on his chest. He sat
on a chair, slapping his grey astrakhan hat against his leg in obvious boredom as he waited for the old ant to finish singing. Eventually the old ant

[ 73 ]

The Life of Insects

second quickly gnawed it off with his mandibles. The thin red stripe along
the trouser-leg jerked in time with the movements of his jaws. When he
had gnawed off the other leg, several more majors appeared. They set their
glasses of champagne on the floor, and the work began to go more quickly. Nikolai stopped playing his invisible accordion only when one of the
new arrivals began to gnaw at his neck and obviously bit through a nerve.
Another major brought a pile of old copies of the newspaper Magadan Ant,
and began to wrap Nikolai’s severed limbs in them. After that, there was a
long gap in Marina’s memory.
The cold snowflakes pricking her face brought her to her senses on the
street. The theatre was now far behind her. In one hand she was carrying
the accordion in its box, and in the other she had two longish, heavy bundles, tightly wrapped in several layers of newspaper. Somehow she managed to reach the point where their outing had begun a few hours earlier,
and she spotted the two rusty garages standing at an angle to each other
at the back of the snow-covered yard. Between the garages she could see a
round depression under the thin layer of snow, and recent footprints. Marina felt under the snow, removed the cover, which was the side of a ‘North
Star’ ci
garette pack, from the entrance to the tunnel, and
went in.
Back in her burrow, it was dark and quiet. Marina set her bundles
down in the snow that had drifted in, and crawled off to bed. Only when
she had scrambled on to the pile of straw did she recall what had happened
at the theatre when they had almost finished cutting Nikolai up. Unable to
watch any more, she had turned away, and then she had seen the ugly
bitch from the market coming down the carpeted staircase, arm-in-arm
with a tall ginger-haired colonel in gleaming boots; she was wearing a
fixed look of triumph and was draped in a lemon-coloured curtain patterned with purple bunches of grapes.

[ 75 ]

The Life of Insects

doing different things.’
‘Who do they suggest them to?’
‘To me.’
‘Aha,’ said Dima. ‘So now there are three of you?’
‘Why three?’
‘The first one, the second one, and the one they make their suggestions to.’
‘You’re playing with words. I can put it another way. When I’m
trying to reach a decision, I constantly come across someone in myself
who has made exactly the opposite decision, and he’s the one who does
everything.’
‘What about you?’
‘What about me? As soon as he appears, I become him.’
‘So he is you?’
‘But I wanted to do just the opposite.’ Mitya said nothing else for
quite a while.
‘The two of them divide up my time between them,’ he began again.
‘One is the real me, the absolute me, the one I regard as myself. The one
who wants to fly towards the light. And the other is a temporary me,
who exists only for a second. He basically wants to fly towards the
light, too, but first he needs a last short period of darkness. As though
to say goodbye, take a final look. The strange thing is that the me who
wants to fly towards the light has my whole life, because he really is
me, and the one who wants to fly into the darkness has only this final
second, but even so . . .’
‘But you still realize that you’re flying into the darkness.’
‘Yes.’
‘And does it surprise you?’
‘Very much.’
Dima threw a crumpled sweet-wrapper overboard and watched .the
bright spot of colour until it disappeared in the foamy wake from the
propeller.
‘A moth’s entire life,’ he said, ‘is that second he wastes in taking
leave of the darkness. Unfortunately, there is nothing else in the world
except that second. This huge life, in which you intend eventually to

[ 77 ]

The Life of Insects

‘The genuine light is any light that you can actually reach. Even if
you only just fail to get there, then no matter how bright the light you
were flying towards, it was a mistake. The real point is not what you
fly towards but who is doing the flying. But then that’s the same
thing.’
‘Yes,’ said Mitya, ‘probably. Then I choose those two red lights up
there.’
Dima looked up at the top of the mountain. ‘Not very close,’ he
said. ‘But then, that doesn’t matter.’
‘What do we do now?’ asked Mitya.
‘Fly.’
‘What, right now?’
‘When else?’ asked Dima.
Mitya climbed over the deck-rail, grabbed hold of a short piece of
rope tied to a flagstaff, and spread his wings. A gust of wind lifted up
his body, and for a moment he looked like a dark flag being raised at
the stern, or a kite soaring up above it. Then he released his grip, and
the launch drifted down and away from him. He saw three small figures among the inflatable life-rafts cluttering the upper deck.
When Dima appeared beside him, flying quickly and inconspicuously, completely without self-indulgence, the figures on the
upper deck began moving. One of them, holding a guitar-case, suddenly got up from his hands and knees, ran a couple of steps, and tumbled
through the air, almost falling into the sea, but just managed to fly off
towards the shore, gradually picking up speed. The other two began
arguing and gesticulating passionately until, just as Mitya could hardly make them out any more, they also flew up into the air. A minute
later the launch was nothing but a bright spot below him, and Mitya
began looking ahead.
In front of him was a sheer rock-face. When he got right up to it,
he had to fly almost vertically upwards. After a few minutes of ascending like this, Mitya’s perspective suddenly shifted, and instead of rising
up, the cliff-face seemed to extend horizontally into the distance, as
though he were flying low over a rocky desert, with the moonlight
highlighting every projection and every crack. The red lights on the

[ 79 ]

The Life of Insects

‘So it turns out that in one sense you are nothing but a sound emitted by a bat. A couplet in its song, so to speak.’
A ponderous black form suddenly loomed up in front of the ledge
and hurtled past, sending a gust of cold air over them. For a minute or
two they heard nothing, and then they heard the same piercing barking sound in the distance. It was coming closer - the bat was obviously moving in to attack.
‘If you are one of the sounds emitted by a bat, then what is the bat?’
‘The thing that’s just about to eat us,’ answered Mitya, feeling the
whistling turn his legs to jelly.
He glimpsed a dark spot far off in the sky, and the whistling grew
louder. In his belly Mitya sensed an inaudible melody, two octaves
higher than anything he had ever heard in his life.
‘Just think,’ said Dima. ‘All the bat has to do is stop whistling and
you disappear. But what do you have to do to make the bat disappear?’
He pushed off from the rim of the ledge and hurtled down, headfirst. Mitya jumped after him, and the dark black mass crashed into the
spot where he had just been standing, breaking the branches of the
bushes.
He fell out of control for several metres, then braked and flew rapidly along the slope, almost snagging his wings on it. Dima had disappeared.
Behind him he heard the sickening whistling sound. He glanced
round and saw a dark shadow soaring and plunging as it flew. A little
further on, he noticed a narrow crevice in the cliff and darted into it.
Squeezing, he pressed himself against the rough surface of the stone
and froze. For a few minutes, everything was quiet and all Mitya could
hear was his own loud breathing. Then he heard the whistling again
from the direction of the sea, and almost immediately the dark mass
crashed into the cliff, covering the opening of the crevice, and a black
clawed hand raked the air just centimetres away from him. Mitya
caught a glimpse of a broad, grey face with pointed ears, little eyes, and
a huge jaw full of teeth (for some reason it reminded him of the radiator on an old Chaika automobile). The bat rustled its wings over the
rocks and disappeared. The feeling Mitya was left with was that a soft,

[ 83 ]

The Life of Insects

had parted, off to one side and much higher. Dima was not on the ledge,
and Mitya flew on towards the top of the mountain. He was sure that
nothing had happened to Dima, but even so, despite the euphoria of his
unexpected victory, he had a feeling of foreboding. When he had been
flying for only a few minutes, and the stone wall drifting past him
seemed to be cast of metal, without a single fault or joint, he heard the
whistling again and realized that the bat had not left him in peace at
all. It had simply waited until he left his refuge and reached a place
where there was nowhere to hide.
Mitya stuck two fingers into his mouth and whistled back as loudly as he could, attempting once again to summon up the mental image
of the black fluffy sphinx, but his whistle was pitiful and the whole
idea seemed extremely stupid. He could now just make out the bat in
the distance, like a black rubber ball bouncing towards him over an
invisible surface, and there was absolutely nowhere to hide from it.
‘What can I do to make it disappear?’ Mitya thought feverishly. ‘To
make me disappear, all it has to do is stop whistling . . . I am what it
hears . . . To make it disappear, perhaps I should stop doing something
as well? But what is it I do to make it appear?’
That was quite impossible to work out. He could understand what
Dima had in mind in the metaphorical sense, but it wasn’t clear at all
what use all the metaphors might be when a very unmetaphorical bat
was chasing you.
Mitya closed his eyes and suddenly saw a clear blue light, as though
his eyes had been closed before but were now open wide in terror. For
the first time he noticed what had always been there in front of him,
but so much closer than everything else that it had been invisible. A
momentary recollection flashed through his mind of a November day
long ago when he could hardly drag himself through a grey park, over
which low leaden clouds were drifting from the north. As he moved
along, he thought that if this weather lasted a few more days, the sky
would sink so low it would run over people like some lorry driven by
a drunken driver. Then he raised his eyes to a gap in the clouds, through
which he could see other white clouds, high up and far away, and
beyond them the sky, exactly as it was in summer, so blue and pure

[ 85 ]

The Life of Insects

the direction of the tourist village.
‘What did you do that for?’ asked Dima.
‘Nothing too serious,’ said Mitya. ‘A mystical debt owed to Marcus
Aurelius.’
‘Ah,’ said Dima. ‘Sometimes debts have to be paid. Now tell me,
what light does the sun reflect?’
Mitya stuck a cigarette in his mouth, clicked his lighter, and a small
bright blue tongue of flame appeared above it.
‘Right,’ said Dima. ‘How simple everything is, isn’t it?’ ‘Yes,’ said
Mitya, ‘it’s amazing.’
He looked up at the lamps blinking on and off overhead. The air
around the glass covers was a trembling mass of hundreds of unfamiliar insects, vainly trying to break through the thick ribbed glass to the
source of the light.
‘Where did the bat go?’ Mitya asked.
‘Where could it go? There it is, flying around.’
Dima pointed to a tiny black lump soaring and plunging through
the air at the edge of the illuminated area. Mitya looked, and then he
glanced at his own hands: they were still bathed in an even blue glow.
‘I’ve just realized,’ he said, ‘that we’re not really moths at all. And
not . . .’
‘It’s probably not even worth trying to express it in words,’ said
Dima. ‘And anyway, nothing around you has changed just because
you’ve understood something. The world’s just the same as it was.
Moths fly towards the light, flies fly towards shit, and they’re all in
total darkness. But now you’ll be different. And you’ll never forget
who you really are, right?’
‘Of course,’ replied Mitya. ‘There’s just one thing I don’t understand. Have I just turned into a firefly, or was I always one?’

[ 87 ]

‘I don’t remember,’ said Arnold. ‘And anyway, that’s enough. We’ve
been through it all.’
‘Okay,’ said Arthur, ‘I suppose we have. Just tell me, though, what
made you take the chance? You saw what happened to Sam.’
‘I can’t really say,’ said Arnold. ‘I picked up the case, and the client
was sleeping like a log. I started wondering how it would affect me. So
I drank some, and then I set off, and it seemed okay. Well, I thought,
Sam’s a real weakling. I set off to meet you, and then . . . All I remember is that Sam was sitting at a table. And who was that girl with him?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Arthur. ‘I couldn’t understand that myself. She
just appeared at the table, out of nowhere. It’s hunger that makes them
so quick nowadays.’
Arnold stood in front of the mirror and tidied himself up as best he
could, then placed a coin on the table in front of the old female attendant. They went out of the public toilets and set off towards the sea.
‘Listen,’ said Arthur, ‘we’ve nothing to do till the evening. Why
don’t we call on Archibald?’
‘Is he still in the same old place?’
‘I think so,’ said Arthur. ‘I sometimes pass his hut, only I never have
time to drop in. But the door’s always open.’
A few minutes later they reached a small log cabin standing on the
grass, its open door facing the promenade: it was so small that it looked
as if it had been taken from a children’s playground. There was a sign
above the door, with a red cross, a red crescent, and a large drop of
blood, and above it in red were the words: Donor Station.
Arthur pushed the door and entered. Arnold smoothed down his
hair one last time and stepped in after him.
It was dark inside. Opposite the door was a low counter with several medicinal-looking jars and an electrical sterilizer for syringes.
Behind the counter, against the wall, stood a dust-covered contraption
made of glass vessels joined by orange rubber tubes. Arnold knew this
heap of flasks and retorts was absolutely no good for anything, nothing but a piece of stage scenery, but even so he felt as though he were
in a hospital. There was no one behind the counter, but there was a
dusty notice on the wall, drawn in ballpoint pen with a stencil:

[ 89 ]

The Life of Insects

large retort full of dark red liquid and three glasses. He set the glasses
on the grass, filled them to the brim, and raised his own.
‘Whose is it?’ inquired Arthur.
‘It’s a cocktail,’ answered Archibald. ‘Turkmenian second group and
Moscow region engineer with negative rhesus factor. Cheers!’
He took a large swallow. Arthur and Arnold took a mouthful each.
‘Agh, what rubbish!’ said Arthur with a grimace. ‘I’m sorry, but
how can you drink it like that, with preservatives?’
‘Can’t be helped,’ said Archibald with a shrug. ‘Otherwise, it curdles
in a day.’
‘Is this how you live? When was the last time you drank fresh
blood?’
‘Yesterday,’ said Archibald. ‘Fifty grams. When there are plenty of
clients I treat myself.’
‘From a glass!’ snorted Arthur. ‘What kind of mosquito are you?
What would your father say if he could see you?’
‘As for what kind of mosquito I am,’ Archibald said apologetically,
‘you mustn’t forget my mother was a ladybird, and my father was a
cockroach. I’ve no idea what I am.’
‘And how does it feel not knowing who you are?’ Archibald drained
his portion of blood and thoughtfully waved the empty glass to and
fro.
‘Not knowing who I am?’ he repeated. ‘I don’t know. I think I like
it. It makes for a quiet life. Of course, when I was young, I didn’t think
I would end up like this. I always thought I was going to step through
a doorway into something astonishing, something new, and with just
a little bit more . . .’ He stopped, fumbling for a word, and twiddled his
fingers in the air, as though trying to show them what he had once
wanted to devote his short life-span to. ‘Just a little more time and I
would step through that door. But the door turned out to be . . .’
He nodded towards the door into the hut.
‘When was the last time you flew?’ asked Arthur.
‘I can’t even remember. You’re filling my head with sad thoughts.
What’s the point, guys?’
‘In your heart you haven’t given up yet,’ said Arthur. ‘I knew it as

[ 91 ]

The Life of Insects

‘But will we find a client?’
‘There are always one or two,’ said Arthur, putting his head down
and flying in front, trying not to go too fast, but not so slow that
Archibald would realize they were making it easy for him.
The seashore ran in a long concave arc, but the three friends flew in
a straight line over the sea. At first Archibald really enjoyed flying, and
was annoyed with himself for neglecting such a pleasure for so many
years, but when fatigue dispelled the rush of blood to his head and he
looked down, he was horrified.
Below the legs pressed against his belly and the guitar which they
were clutching like a missile slung under the belly of a B-52, there lay
the open sea. It was a long way beneath him, and the waves on its surface appeared quite motionless. The shore was so far away that Arnold
realized that if he fell now, he’d never make it by swimming. He was
terrified, and he rolled his eyes up to heaven.
Arthur and Arnold were in high spirits, exchanging asides on the
weather, and they seemed to have forgotten about Archibald. They were
flying further and further away from the shore, and Archibald went
into a panic: his fear made him flap his wings faster than necessary. At
first he thought he could make it to the nature reserve after all, and he
almost relaxed, having decided never again to get himself into an
adventure like this, when suddenly he felt a powerful blow to his face
and chest.
Archibald screwed up his stinging eyes and raised one foot to wipe
them. When he looked at it, the entire foot was covered with coarse
tobacco. There was tobacco in his eyes and mouth, and stuck in his
hair, but Archibald had no time to wonder where so much tobacco had
come from at such a height - his guitar had suddenly become extremely heavy, and he felt that his wings would fail in another fifty metres.
‘Hey, guys,’ he called to Arthur and Arnold. Realizing they couldn’t
hear him, he buzzed as loud as he could. ‘Guys!’
They turned round and understood immediately what the problem
was.
‘Can you make it to the shore?’ asked Arthur, hurrying back to him.
‘No,’ panted Archibald. ‘I’m going to fall any second.’

[ 95 ]

The Life of Insects

Archibald turned around a few times and finally settled on his
hands and knees, with his face towards the white foamy wake.
‘God!’ he said. ‘What a life I’ve been living. It’s all wrong!’
‘Calm down,’ ordered Arthur. ‘Us, too. But don’t get hysterical
about it.’
‘The sea,’ said Archibald, slowly and distinctly. ‘A launch sailing
across it. Seagulls. And it’s all right here. And I . . . He went out on the
deck, and there was no deck . . .’
In the distance, close by the mountain, several flat rocks rose up out
of the water. Archibald caught a glimpse of two naked bodies lying on
top of one of them, and then they disappeared behind a cliff-face.
Archibald gave an inarticulate groan, as though all the self-hatred that
had been building up in his heart for so long, all the contempt for his
flabby body and his senseless life, had suddenly surged to the surface,
and before his friends could do anything to stop him, he had grabbed
the guitar and flung himself into the air.
His field of awareness narrowed into something like a rocket's targeting system, registering nothing but the flat rock with two bodies
lying on it, which came closer and closer, fill-ing up the whole of space.
Then his new target became the woman's leg that was hurtling towards
him, and Archibald could feel his proboscis straightening up and
swelling with a long-forgotten strength. He buzzed loudly in his happiness and thrust himself at full speed towards the yielding skin, thinking how Arthur and Arnold . . .
But then some terrible weight came crashing down out of the sky,
something final and unambiguous - and suddenly there was no need to
think, nothing to think about, and no one to do the thinking.
`I didn't mean to,' Natasha repeated, with her eyes red from crying,
pressing her crumpled dress to her naked breasts. `I didn't mean to! I
didn't even notice!'
`Nobody's accusing anybody,' Arthur said drily. He was wet. `It's
simply an accident, a very unfortunate accident.' Sam put his arms
around Natasha and turned her away, so that she no longer had to look
at the thing that once walked the earth, took joy in life, sucked blood,

[ 97 ]

The Life of Insects

,Sometimes you wake up at night at about tern to three,
Gaze out of the window at the light of what they call the moon,
Recall the world is a hallucination o f police in former Nickleby,
Who in turn is the hallucination of some drunken loon.
It’s a good thing, too, to have your run-ins with the madmen
As they pursue you, waving their razors and drinking beer.
You run away from one, then another, then a third one,
And don’t have a moment to feel your loneliness and fear.
It would be good just to lie low until the summer,
And keep your head well down out of sight,
Making sure the KGB doesn’t catch the slightest glimmer
Of your bright circle of the universe’s all-pervading light.

The final quatrain had been added in vigorous slanting handwriting,
obviously in haste. ‘KGB’ had been crossed out, and ‘AFB’ written in
above it, and then also crossed out. Beside it were the letters ‘FSK’, also
erased, and replaced again finally by the more permanent ‘KGB’.

[ 99 ]

The Life of Insects

looked behind Maxim, and only when he was sure there was nobody
and nothing else outside the door did he take off the safety chain.
‘Come in,’ he said.
Maxim went in. While Nikita was locking the door and setting the
table against it, Maxim looked around. The interior hadn’t changed at
all, except for a new display stand Nikita had picked up somewhere,
Imperialism’s Means of Aerial Aggression, covered with big black-andwhite photographs of aeroplanes. It was leaning against an old pile of
compressed rubbish, in which Maxim could distinguish only a few old
canvas stretchers. The mattress on which Nikita slept was covered with
several blankets, and spread on top of them was a newspaper, with a
huge pile of weed on it. From its dark green colour with a reddish tinge
Maxim identified it as badly overdried north-western Chuiskaya valley
hash from the late spring harvest of the previous year. It looked like a
respectable pile, about seven glasses and seven boxes of matches, and
Maxim suddenly felt a simple and calm joy in existence, which gradually crystallized as a sense of confidence, not only for the next day but
for at least the next two weeks. Beside the newspaper lay a large magnifying glass, a sheet of paper on which there were several green spots,
and Nikita’s favourite book, Spacers, open at a page in the middle.
‘You got any papyrosi?’ asked Nikita.
Maxim nodded and took a pack of Kazbek out of his pocket.
‘Blow them yourself then,’ said Nikita, picking up the magnifying
glass and bending down over the sheet of paper.
Maxim squatted down beside the newspaper and opened the pack of
Kazbek. The black silhouette of a horseman on the pack gave him an
uneasy feeling, and he took out several of the cigarettes with their long
cardboard tubes for tips and hid the pack away in his pocket. He took
one of them, turned the end filled with tobacco towards the stand with
the photographs, and blew hard into the hollow cardboard tip. The
tobacco filling flew out of the paper cylinder and smashed into one of
the black aeroplanes. Maxim read the words underneath it and saw he’d
hit a B-52 Stratofortress bomber, complete with a ‘hound dog’ missile
slung under its fuselage.
‘The target has been destroyed,’ he whispered, then took the empty

[ 101 ]

The Life of Insects

had made such an impression that every new delivery was inevitably
compared with it.
When he had finished his joint, Nikita picked up the magnifyingglass and leaned over the sheet of paper with the scattered green dots.
‘What’s that you’re looking at?’ asked Maxim.
‘Hemp bugs,’ said Nikita.
‘What’re hemp bugs?’
‘Never seen them?’ Nikita asked in a melancholy voice. ‘Take a look.’
Maxim moved closer to the sheet of paper. There were pieces of dry
hemp lying on it, all about the same size, two or three millimetres long,
and all consisting of a section of leaf and a short length of stem, which
made them all the same triangular shape. Maxim made a quick guess
as to how long it must have taken Nikita to sift through a whole pile
of weed and collect these bits, and he gave his friend a glance of admiration.
‘You’re having me on,’ he said. ‘Don’t tell me these are bugs!’
‘That’s what I thought at first,’ said Nikita. ‘But take a look
through the magnifying-glass.’
Maxim took the glass and bent over the paper. At first he didn’t
notice anything unusual in the magnified fragments of leaf, but then
he saw they had strange symmetrical striped markings, which he suddenly recognized as legs pressed tight against bellies. Then there was an
incredible transformation, the way it happens with those puzzles
where you recognize a drawing of something in a chaotic tangle of
lines. The entire sheet of paper, which before had been covered with
hemp debris, was now scattered with small flat brownish-green insects
with long oblong heads, hard triangular bodies - the bugs obviously
still had rudimentary wings, he could even see the line dividing them and legs pressed against their bodies.
‘Are they dead,’ asked Maxim, ‘or sleeping?’
‘No,’ answered Nikita. ‘They’re just pretending. If you don’t watch
them for a tong time, they start crawling about.’
‘I’d never have guessed,’ muttered Maxim. ‘Whoa, they’re moving
now. When did you notice them?’ ‘Yesterday,’ said Nikita.
‘Yourself?’

[ 103 ]

The Life of Insects

were in the middle of the news.
‘Speaking at a session of the United Nations,’ said a xylophonic
female voice, ‘King Hussein of Jordan said that he thought the American plant for a Middle East settlement was ineffective. He announced
that the Arab nations had their own plant, with which the international community should become more familiar. And now a few words
about events here at home. There are reports from the Kuzbass that at
the Novoktamatorsky Metallurgical Plant the seventh blast furnace
since the beginning of the five-year plant has been lit. For our listeners’
information, one furnace is equal to ten glasses, or a hundred matchboxes, or a thousand joints.’
Nikita bent down and switched off the radio.
‘No time to wait,’ he said. ‘We’ll ask someone out on the street.’
‘A thousand joints,’ Maxim repeated in a dreamy voice, opening his
eyes wide. ‘Hey, did you hear what they were saying on the radio?’
‘Sure,’ answered Nikita. ‘What of it?’
‘And you’re not a bit surprised?’
‘Nah.’
‘You’re too cool altogether,’ Maxim laughed. ‘A real dope-head. Didn’t you notice anything at all?’
‘What should I have noticed?’
‘About the five-year plant - there aren’t any more five-year plants.’
‘There may not be any more five-year plants,’ said Nikita, ‘but
there’s still five-year plant material. They’ve dried enough for five
years in advance.’
‘Ah-ah!’ said Maxim, catching on.
‘Let’s go quick,’ said Nikita, glancing out of the window, ‘while
there’s no one around outside. Shall we take the other joint with us?’
‘Sure,’ said Maxim, sticking the papyrosa into his pocket.
Nikita stopped at the door. ‘Stop,’ he said. ‘That’s no good.’
‘What’s no good?’
‘You look too fishy, that’s what. Turn your cap round.’
Maxim obediently took off his cap and then put it back on with the
tassel to the front. That was good enough for Nikita, and he opened the
door.

[ 105 ]

The Life of Insects

he restrained himself. Nikita always behaved like this when he felt
someone was about to ask him for weed.
‘You’re just like my local militia sergeant, Nikita,’ Maxim said quietly. ‘He used to explain life to me, too. “Maxim,” he used to say, “you
don’t want to take a real job in a factory, and so you go thinking up all
kinds of nonsense.”‘
‘He was right. The only difference between you and that sergeant is
that when he puts on his boots he doesn’t realize it’s an aesthetic statement.’
‘And just who are you?’ said Maxim, his self-control failing. ‘Are
you telling me you’re not a post-modernist? You’re exactly the same
kind of shit.’
But Nikita had already calmed down, and his eyes were once again
veiled with languid melancholy.
‘It was a good picture, too,’ said Maxim. ‘Death by Harpoon Gun.
Which of your periods was it from? Astrakhan?’
‘Nah,’ answered Nikita. ‘Kirghizian.’
‘I’m sure it was the Astrakhan period,’ said Maxim.
‘Nah,’ said Nikita. ‘The Astrakhan period was Non-Humanoid Prisoners at the Headquarters of the Kiev Military District. I had a long
Kirghizian period, then a short Astrakhan one, and another Kirghizian
one. I’ll never forgive Gorbachev for losing Central Asia. He wrecked a
great country.’
‘You think he meant to?’ Maxim asked, trying to steer the conversation as far away as possible from this dangerous topic. ‘He just didn’t have any clear plant of action.’
Nikita dropped the conversation. The highway they were walking
along was taking them further and further away from the sea. They
were surrounded by bare hills, and Maxim thought that if it started
raining again, they’d have nowhere to shelter. He felt a chill run
through him.
‘Let’s go back,’ he said. ‘Hey, leave me the butt!’
Nikita took a final drag and handed the butt to Maxim.
‘Why go back?’ he said. ‘We’ll turn off here. We can get straight
through.’

[ 109 ]

The Life of Insects

turned off the highway on to the road he and Nikita were walking
along.
‘Run for it,’ whispered Maxim, dashing into the space between two
rows of big slabs. Nikita ran after him. They heard the motor growling as it grew closer, and then it stopped.
‘They’ve got out of the jeep!’ Maxim whined. He slipped on a wet
plank, fell, jumped to his feet, dashed round another stack of slabs, and
dived into an empty concrete pipe lying on some wet boards in front of
a huge heap of empty boxes. Nikita followed him. The pipe was almost
two metres in diameter, so they didn’t even have to bend down. Maxim
and Nikita ran all the way through it until they reached a dead-end,
where the walls came together in a shallow cone, with an opening at
its centre about the size of a human head.
‘Did they see us?’ asked Nikita.
‘Quiet!’ whispered Maxim.
‘They won’t hear us,’ said Nikita. ‘The acoustics are all wrong.
Don’t panic.’
‘Who’s panicking?’ said Maxim. ‘Me? Was it me who suggested pretending to be dead, like those bugs?’
Nikita said nothing and looked towards the way out - it was a
bright circle fifteen metres away, which seemed very small. It was
damp in the pipe. He turned to look at Maxim. When Maxim began
thinking, his face changed, losing its usual expression of polite dignity
and looking instead like a prosthetic device: there were lots of faces like
that in the photographs from the USSR Ministry of Fisheries archives
which Nikita was using in his current period. The photos had found
their way into Nikita’s hands after complicated double and triple deals
in hash.
‘We’ll wait half an hour,’ said Maxim, ‘and then we can go out and
take a look. You still high?’
‘Yeah,’ said Nikita.
‘Strong stuff. Can I borrow a couple of matchboxes?’
Nikita nodded.
‘Damn,’ said Maxim, knowing that once Nikita had agreed in principle he had to change the topic of conversation as quickly as possible,

[ 111 ]

The Life of Insects

en crates kept on tumbling into the pipe, and one hit Nikita on his
hands. He lost his grip and rolled back along the pipe towards Maxim.
The wind was now so strong that the crates were flying into the pipe,
shattering against the concrete walls. Nikita covered his ears with his
hands and closed his eyes as he felt the pressure build up. His body was
pinned down by a splintered mass of wooden slats and he could scarcely move. Then the wind stopped, as suddenly as it had started.
‘Hey, Maxim!’ Nikita shouted. ‘Are you still alive?’
‘Yes. Where are you?’
‘Here. Where the hell else could I be?’ Nikita answered.
Maxim’s back was flattened against the steep concrete overhang,
and the space around him was packed so tightly with broken crates
that he couldn’t move a muscle. Judging from Nikita’s voice, he was
fairly close, maybe only three or four metres away behind the heapedup debris, but Maxim couldn’t see him.
‘What was that?’ Maxim asked.
‘You mean you haven’t caught on yet?’ Nikita replied maliciously.
‘We’ve been packed into a joint.’
‘I think my leg’s broken,’ Maxim complained.
‘Serves you right. How many times have I told you not to make
joints without tobacco. Not that it makes any difference now, of course
. . .’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Just think about it, Maxim.’
But there was no time to think. The wind started up again, and this
time it was carrying thick gusts of smoke with it. Both of them began
coughing. Maxim felt a wave of scorching heat and through the gaps
between the shattered slats of wood he glimpsed the red glimmer of distant flames. Then everything was enveloped in smoke, and he closed his
eyes. He couldn’t keep them open.
‘Nikita!’ he shouted.
Nikita didn’t reply.
‘Right,’ thought Maxim. ‘I’m at the end, and a joint is about eight
drags. There’ve already been two. That means . . .’
Another wave of scalding heat enveloped him and he began to

[ 113 ]

10 Flight Over the Nest of the Enemy

The rain drummed heavily on the roof of the bus-shelter. Natasha sat
on the narrow yellow bench, huddled into the cold angle of glass, and
cried. Sam sat beside her and shuddered when water from the road
splashed them.
‘Natasha.’ He called her name and tried to pull her hands away
from her face.
‘Sam,’ said Natasha, ‘don’t look at me. My eyes are all swollen.’
‘You must calm down,’ said Sam. ‘Take some medicine or something
. . .’
He thrust two fingers into the breast pocket of his shirt, drew out a
long papyrosa with the paper twisted at the end into the form of an
arrow-tip, looked at it doubtfully, and stuck it in his mouth. He lit up,
took a couple of pulls on the joint, and then tapped Natasha on the
shoulder.
‘Here, try this.’
Natasha peeped out from behind her hands.
‘What is it?’ she asked.
‘Marijuana,’ said Sam.
‘Where did you get it?’
‘You won’t believe me,’ said Sam. ‘I was walking along the promenade this morning, before there was anyone around, and I heard hoofbeats. I turned round to look, and there was a horseman dressed all in
black, wearing a long heavy cloak, riding towards me. His horse reared
up and he held out this cigarette, so I took it. And then the horse
neighed so loudly . . .’
‘What then?’ asked Natasha.
‘He galloped off.’

[ 115 ]

The Life of Insects

He put his hand on Natasha’s leg.
‘Does it hurt?’
Natasha looked at Sam with empty, enigmatic eyes.
‘Kiss me, Sam,’ she said to him.
The rain was easing off. There were notices stuck on the glass walls
of the bus-shelter. As he pressed his lips against Natasha’s, Sam saw
directly in front of him a piece of paper with the words, ‘Fat dog for sale
cheap. Phone evenings. Ask for Seryozha.’ The little strips of paper with
the telephone number had all been torn off, and the handwriting was
large, firm, and inclined to the left.
‘Oh, Sam,’ said Natasha, ‘no one’s ever kissed me like that before.’
‘Where can we go?’ asked Sam.
‘My mother’s at home,’ said Natasha, ‘and we’re not talking.’
‘Maybe we could go to my hotel?’
‘Oh no! What would people think of me? Everybody knows everybody else around here. Better go to my place.’
‘What about your mother?’
‘She won’t see us. But she has this terrible habit of reading aloud all
the time. Otherwise, she can’t understand what she’s reading.’
‘Is it far?’
‘No,’ said Natasha. ‘It’s very near. A few minutes at the most. Sam,
I look a real mess, don’t I?’
Sam got up, stepped out from under the shelter, and looked around.
‘Let’s go,’ he said. ‘The rain’s stopped.’
The rain had transformed the path to the holiday camp into a torrent of mud, and the silvery Lenin rising up beside it looked like the figurehead of a ship that had been sucked down into the sticky red bog. At
first Sam tried to step where the mud appeared to be less deep, but
when they’d gone a few metres he began to feel as though the path was
a vicious and cunning beast determined to make him as filthy as possible.
He slithered across to the grass and walked there instead. His legs
were immediately soaked, but the mud on his moccasins was quickly
wiped away by the grass. Natasha walked ahead, holding a slipper in
each hand, maintaining her balance with astonishing grace.

[ 117 ]

The Life of Insects

‘Is that the politician?’ whispered Sam.
‘No, his grandfather. You can talk normally now,’ said Natasha.
‘She won’t hear anything.’
‘Does she often act like this?’ asked Sam.
‘For days at a time. Shall we put on some music?’
‘No, let’s not,’ said Sam.
‘Let me have a drag,’ said Natasha, sitting on Sam’s knees and taking the lighted cigarette out of his fingers.
Sam put his arm round her belly and fingered the hollow of her
navel through the wet green fabric.
‘And so,’ the high voice continued monotonously behind the curtain, ‘it turns out that, in essence, Gaidar’s prose has no reader. Adults
will not read it, and children will not even notice anything, dust as the
English do not notice that they are reading in English. “Farewell!” I
flung at them. “The drums are beating the campaign march. Every
detachment has its own road, its own shame, its own glory.” And so
we parted. The tramping of feet faded away and the field was left
empty . . .’
‘How can she read like that, without any light?’ Sam asked softly,
trying to distract Natasha’s attention from the awkward pause caused
by the resistance of her plastic zip.
‘I don’t know,’ whispered Natasha. ‘As long as I can remember she’s
done that . . . She probably remembers things off by heart.’
‘You see the world through the eyes of a little boy,’ read the voice,
‘not because the feelings described are primitive- they are, in fact, quite
complex - but because of the infinite possibilities which the world of A
Drummer’s Fate contains. It seems to be one of the qualities of life which
it is unnecessary, would even be wrong, to dwell on, this indifferent
and rather sad ease with which the hero negotiates new turning-points
in his life. “Now no one will know me or understand me,” I thought.
“My uncle will put me in midshipman school, and he’ll go away to
Vyatka . . . Well, let him! I’ll live alone and I’ll do the best I can. And I
won’t give a damn about the past, I’ll forget it, as though it never existed” . . . The universe in which the hero lives is truly beautiful: “On the
mountainside above the ravine there was a cluster of tall white build-

[ 119 ]

The Life of Insects

associations . . .’
Sam felt his proboscis straightening up under Natasha’s dexterous
hands, and he looked ecstatically into her eyes. A long dark tongue with
a shaggy tip divided into two short hairy branches hung from her jaw.
The tongue shuddered in excitement, and dark green drops of a thick
secretion trickled down it.
‘Eat me,’ whispered Natasha, tugging on the antennae protruding
from beneath Sam’s eyes, and he buzzed and groaned as his proboscis
crunched through the green chitin of her back.
‘. . . relations with Nietzscheanism were always complicated. Dostoyevsky attempted to demonstrate its bankruptcy by artistic means,
and he did so quite convincingly, though we must make one qualification here: he demonstrated that such a system of values was not suitable for his creation Rodion Raskolnikov. But Gaidar has created a no
less convincing and no less artistically true image of the superman, that
is, an image which does not contradict the author’s own paradigm.
Seryozha is completely amoral, and this is hardly surprising, because
in all cultures any morality or any substitute for it is implanted in a
child’s soul by means of a special lollipop, the lollipop of beauty. Instead
of the somewhat banal fascist state of A Drummer’s Fate, Seryozha’s
blue eyes see a boundless romantic expanse, populated by tall giants
engaged in a mystical battle, the nature of which is partially revealed
when Seryozha asks an older superman, NKVD Major Gerchakov, what
forces the adult who was killed a few days before served in: “The man
laughed. He didn’t answer, but drew in the smoke from his crooked
pipe, spat on the grass, and gestured lazily in the direction of the crimson setting sun.”‘
Natasha pressed herself close against Sam’s rapidly swelling and
hardening abdomen, which had turned crimson, and pushed against it
with all her six legs.
‘Oh,’ she whispered in English, ‘it’s getting so big and hard...’
‘Yeah, baby,’ Sam answered indistinctly. ‘You smell good. And you
sure taste good.’
‘And so,’ said the woman behind the curtain, ‘we have more or less
clarified what Gaidar wrote. Now let us consider why he wrote it. Why

[ 123 ]

The Life of Insects

‘Look,’ said Natasha, and showed him an oval scar on her shoulder,
like the mark from a smallpox vaccination magnified several times over.
‘What is it?’ asked Sam.
‘It’s from DDT, and I’ve got another one on my leg from formalin.’
‘What, did someone try to kill you?’
‘All of us,’ said Natasha. ‘They want to kill everyone who lives here.’
‘Who?’ asked Sam.
Instead of answering, Natasha gave a loud sob.
‘But there’s such a thing as insect rights . . .’
‘There aren’t any rights,’ said Natasha, waving her hand dismissively. ‘Do you know what calcium cyanamide does? Two hundred
grams in every cowshed? Or what it’s like when they sprinkle vitriol
on a cess-pit and it’s too late to fly away? Two of my girlfriends were
killed like that, and another one, Mashenka, got dusted with chloride of
lime. From a helicopter. She was studying French, the silly fool . . . And
you talk about the rights of insects! Have you ever heard of sulphurcarbolic mixture? One part crude sulphuric acid to three parts raw carbolic. That’s all the rights we have. Nobody here has ever had any
rights or ever will have any; it’s just that they’ - Natasha jerked her
head up - ‘need foreign currency. For tennis rackets and tights for their
wives. Sam, don’t you understand? It’s terrible living here.’
Sam stroked Natasha’s hair, glanced at the poster decorating the
fridge, and remembered Sylvester Stallone, his clothing reduced by the
inexorable force of circumstance to nothing but a skimpy pair of swimming trunks, on the bank of a yellowish Vietnamese river with a heavily armed slant-eyed girl. ‘Will you take me with you?’ she asked.
‘Will you take me with you?’ asked Natasha.
Rambo thought for a second. ‘Yeah,’ said Rambo.
Sam thought for a second. ‘You see, Natasha,’ he began, then suddenly gave a deafening sneeze.
Behind the curtain, something large stirred and sighed. The monotonous monologue continued.
‘As we close A Drummer’s Fate we know what the warm and tender
voice described by the author whispered to the young gun-carrying
Gaidar. But why is it that this particular young marksman, whom

[ 125 ]

11 The Well

The blades of grass bent down under their own weight, forming a multitude of gateways, each lasting only a second, while the light brown
trunks of the immense trees soared up into the green night sky - in fact
their fused crowns were the sky. Mitya flew between the blades of
grass, constantly changing direction, and ahead of him appeared ever
new corridors of swaying triumphal arches. The grass glowed in the
dark when it was bent over by the wind, or perhaps the glow appeared
in the air every time one of the stems moved through it, as though the
shifting grass were scratching light out of darkness.
Down below, life continued its monotonous motions, with myriads
of different-coloured insects crawling over the ground, each pushing a
sphere of dung. Some of them opened their wings and attempted to fly,
but only a few managed it, and even they fell back almost immediately to earth under the weight of their spheres. Most of the insects were
moving in the same direction, towards a clearing flooded with light,
which could sometimes be glimpsed through the gaps between the
blades of grass. Mitya flew in that direction, too, and soon he saw
ahead of him a large tree-stump from some southern tree which he didn’t recognize. Completely rotten, it glowed in the darkness. The entire
clearing in front of it was covered with a colourful shifting carpet of
insects. They were gazing spellbound at the stump, which emitted
waves of charismatic energy that transformed it into the sole and
incontrovertible source of meaning and light in the universe. Somehow
or other Mitya understood that these waves were nothing more than a
reflection of the attention of all the insects who had gathered there in
the clearing to see the tree-stump.
Flying a little closer, he could make out a small group of insects

[ 127 ]

The Life of Insects

and off at incredible speed, each time catching a crowd of plaster-cast
insects in the darkness, almost the same as those which had been there
a moment before, but just a little different.
Down below, an uninterrupted stream of insects hurried towards
the stump, pressing in on those who had already travelled this route
and trampling them into the ground, as though the multi-coloured living carpet were stretching towards the stump and folding back under
itself. Insects jumped up on to the stump, and most of them lost their
grip and tumbled back down, under the legs, pincers, and antennae of
others who were crawling in from all sides to take their place, but some
managed to climb up and join the insects standing on the green glowing rim. They scrambled up as quickly as they could and immediately
turned around like the others, avoiding at all costs looking at what was
at the centre of the stump; then they began conducting, keeping up a
continuous melody.
Mitya flew away. There was no one for him to tell that this stump
and all the insects who had gathered on it were by no means everything
in the world, and this made him feel sad, and he felt even more sad
because he himself was not entirely sure. But when he reached the edge
of the clearing he saw the diffused light emitted by the grass, and he
remembered how he’d felt before he reached the clearing with the rotten stump, and calmed down. Once again the triumphal arches of the
bowed blades of grass rushed past above his head, and the further he
flew from the clearing, the fewer insects he saw below him. Soon there
were none at all, and then flowers began to appear. They seemed to be
specially planted beds of unusual varieties, but they gave out such a
stupefying scent that Mitya preferred to admire them from a distance,
especially as there were bees, who had retired from the world crawling
about on some of them, and he did not wish to intrude on their isolation.
Mitya glimpsed a red tight ahead of him through the grass, and
automatically turned towards it. When he was close enough for everything around him to be surrounded by a reddish reflected glow, he flew
stealthily, hovering for long periods behind broad blades of grass and
flitting imperceptibly from one to another. After repeating this

[ 129 ]

The Life of Insects

ing behind the next blade of grass.’
‘Can this be true?’ inquired the first beetle.
‘Of course,’ said the second. ‘But you know it yourself.’
‘And what does he intend to do?’ asked the first beetle.
‘He intends,’ said the second, ‘to jump into well number one.’
‘This is interesting,’ said the first beetle, ‘but why well number one?
He might equally choose well number three.’
‘Yes,’ replied the second, ‘or well number nine.’
‘Or even well number fourteen,’ said the first beetle.
‘But it is best of all,’ said the second, ‘to jump into well number
forty-eight.’
Mitya pressed himself tight against the stem, listening as the numbers increased just a few metres away from him, and then a hand was
placed on his shoulder and he was shaken powerfully.
Turning his head, he saw Dima leaning over him. They were on the
ledge at the top of the mountain, with the mast with the two red
lamps, no longer lit, rising above them. Two folding stools lay beside
them, and Mitya was lying under a bush.
‘Get up,’ said Dima. ‘We don’t have much time.’
Mitya stood up and shook his head in an attempt to remember the
dream he had just had, but it had already evaporated, leaving behind
nothing but a vague and indefinite sensation.
Dima set off along a narrow path leading away from the mast with
the two red lamps. Mitya plodded after him, still yawning, but when
they had walked a few metres and the path had become a narrow ledge
with nothing below it but a drop down to the sea, the tattered remnants of sleep abandoned him totally. The path dipped into a crevice
between the rocks, passed under a low stone archway (here Mitya
vaguely recalled something to do with his dream), and led them out
into a narrow ravine overgrown with dark bushes. Mitya picked a few
cold sloes, tossed them into his mouth, and instantly spat them out
when he saw a white skull lying under the bush. The skull was small
and narrow, like a dog’s.
‘There!’ said Dima, pointing at the bushes.
‘What?’ asked Mitya.

[ 131 ]

The Life of Insects

strange work. They were cutting circles with small projections out of
cardboard and threading them on a gleaming metal rod, as though they
were receipts in a shop. The cardboard circles gradually grew smaller
and smaller, until finally the form on the metal rod was a human head
composed of thin layers of cardboard. They smeared it with blue plasticine, and that was the end of the film.
What Mitya saw now reminded him most of all of those cardboard
circles. The very last of the circles was his fright when he fell into the
well, and the one before that was his fear that a prickly branch would
lash into his eyes, and before that there was his annoyance that the
world of his dream, where the two red beetles conversed on a long blade
of grass, had disappeared so quickly. Even earlier there was his fear of
the bat, the delight in flying over the rocks flooded with moonlight, the
struggle with Dima’s incomprehensible question, the depression
induced by the tapping of the dominoes on the deserted promenade, and
even more by the immediate appearance of a chattering group of domino players in his own head - and so on, lower and lower, on through
his entire life, through all the compressed and fossilized feelings he had
ever experienced.
At first Mitya decided that he was seeing himself, but he immediately realized that nothing the well contained had any connection with
him at all. He was not this well, he was the person who fell into it, at
the same time as staying exactly where he was. Perhaps he was the
plasticine binding together the super-thin layers of feelings which were
overlaid one on top of the other. He passed through all the meaningless
snapshots of his life leading back to the point of birth, and when he
reached it and tried to go on further to find the beginning, he realized
he was staring into eternity.
There was no bottom to the well. There never was a beginning.
Then suddenly Mitya noticed another thing: nothing in the well
below the point from which he was accustomed to begin his personal
accounting was in the least bit frightening, not the world beyond the
grave or the world on this side of the grave - a nice phrase, he thought
- or the least bit mysterious or strange. It had all always been there
beside him, closer than beside him, and he hadn’t remembered it

[ 135 ]

The Life of Insects

‘Wherever you like.’
Mitya closed his eyes and in the darkness which descended he saw
a bright blue point of light. It was motionless, but in some strange way
he could direct it on to anything he chose.
Mitya heard the rasping song of a cicada, directed his blue point of
light towards the insect, and suddenly he was remembering an evening
long before, when he first stood on his own feet. It happened very early,
immediately after he hatched from the egg and fell to the earth from
the branch of the tree in which he began his existence.

[ 137 ]

The Life of Insects

The experience of all those years spent creeping through the soft
Russian loam (which one morning suddenly turned out to be the noble
black earth of Ukraine) fused into one single promising memory, of
himself shuddering with the frosty cold as he looked in at a newly
cleaned window and saw the black gloom of winter gathered around a
brightly lit children's playground, and in a circle of light in the centre
there was a snowwoman with a coronet of carrots stuck on her head,
looking like the Statue of Liberty he'd seen in a magazine he had dug up
not far from the window. The glass was covered in a tracery of frost,
with a pattern very much like a small grove of palm trees. The palms
seemed to sway as he breathed on them. It was impossible to climb
through the window, and Seryozha stood beside it for a long time,
yearning for something he couldn't explain, and then he began digging
his tunnel again, carrying the undeciphered dream in his heart.
By the time he began wondering whether he was doing everything
right, his life had become a routine, consisting for the most part of
events very much like each other repeated in a monotonous sequence.
Ahead of him, directly in front of his face and shoulders, there was a
circle of dark firm earth. Behind him was the tunnel he had dug so far,
but Seryozha never looked back and never counted how many metres
he had come. He knew that other insects, ants for instance, were happy
with a fairly short burrow and could carry out their life's work in a
few hours using the serrated edges of their legs. But he never dwelt on
such comparisons, aware that once he stopped and began to compare
himself with others, it would begin to seem that he had already
achieved quite a lot, and he would lose the sense of resentment towards
life that was essential to continue his struggle.
His achievements did not exist in a form which could be touched or
added up; they consisted of the meetings and events which each new
day brought. When he woke in the morning, he went on digging his
tunnel again, raking out the earth with his powerful front legs and
using his back legs to push it aside. After a few minutes, breakfast
would appear among the grey-brown lumps of earth, in the form of
thin shoots or roots, from which Seryozha sucked out the juice while
he read some newspaper or other that he usually unearthed together

[ 139 ]

The Life of Insects

Sometimes, it was true, there were pleasant surprises in the earth:
for instance, there might be the lower half of a female torso protruding
from the wall (Seryozha never unearthed women above the waist,
believing that this would only cause problems), or a couple of cans of
beer, in honour of which he would allow himself a little break, but
most of his path was travelled in working. In order to have some kind
of explanation for the strange fact that although he always moved in
the same direction by the compass he often dug his way through beds
of earth with identical items embedded in them, like the drawing-desks,
his colleagues, and even the view from a window, Seryozha made an
analogy with a train moving forward, constantly approaching the ultimate sleeper, which was indistinguishable from the others beside it.
But there were certain differences: sometimes the office through
which Seryozha made his daily dig would change, the drawing-desks
were rearranged, the colour of the walls was different, someone
appeared for the first time or disappeared for ever.
His work was not difficult at all: he had to redraw old blueprints on
to newsprint: several other employees did the same thing. In the morning they usually struck up a long unhurried conversation, and it was
impossible not to join in. They spoke in the usual manner about everything under the sun, but since the range of topics they dealt with was
very limited, Seryozha noticed that with every day that passed there
was less under the sun than there had been before - less than there had
been, for instance, that evening when he sat under the branch and listened to the song of the cicadas who had dug their way out from
underground.
This unavoidable social intercourse with his colleagues had a bad
effect on Seryozha. He began crawling differently, pressing his head
hard against the earth, and sometimes when he was unearthing the
long staircase down to the buffet, he used his face as well as his hands.
He also began to regard life in a different light. His previous desire to dig
his tunnel as far as possible began to give way to a sense of responsibility towards his future, and this feeling produced purely anatomical
changes.
Once he noticed that he was sitting at his desk, using both hands to

[ 141 ]

The Life of Insects

militiaman's boot. He knew immediately what to do. He carefully
sprinkled earth back over the boot and began digging to the left, to get
as far away from the spot as possible. On other occasions he encountered items of military equipment projecting from the earth - truncheons, walkie-talkies, shaved heads in peaked caps. He was lucky with
the heads, because he always unearthed them from the back, so the pigs
couldn't see him. After a while he began coming across cash in the
earth. At first it was just isolated notes, but then whole bundles began
to appear, usually not too far away from a militiaman's truncheon or
boot. Seryozha began working painstakingly, like an archaeologist,
clearing away the earth from the pieces of military equipment he
encountered, and it was a rare occasion when he crawled away with
out several heavy, wet bundles of notes seated with strips of paper.
He began to be less careful and once an accidental movement of his
hand swept away the earth from the round face of a militiaman with
a whistle stuck in its lips. The face glared at him and inflated its cheeks,
but before a sound emerged, Seryozha tugged the whistle out of its
mouth and stuck a packet of cash in its place. The face closed its eyes
and Seryozha moved on, gradually recovering his composure. Soon his
fingers encountered another object, which felt like a militiaman's boot.
Clearing away the earth, Seryozha saw the word 'Reebok'. He dug
upwards and soon unearthed Grisha's face.
'Nice to see you at last,' said Grisha.
The cash Seryozha had dug up on his advice made not the slightest
impression on Grisha.
'Use it to buy money before it's too late,' Grisha advised him, and he
showed Seryozha several green banknotes.
'And anyway, you've got to dig out of here as quickly as you can.'
Seryozha himself realized that there was nowhere he could dig out
of apart from here; however, he took Grisha's words to, heart and
remembered that first he had to dig up an invitation.
On his route through the earth he still regularly encountered the
doorway home, the television, the bathroom, and the kitchen, but now
he began digging up American magazines and studying English, which
he spoke with faces that appeared out of the walls very occasionally.

[ 145 ]

The Life of Insects

used to find, and it didn't turn up in bundles, but Seryozha didn't lose
heart. Often there were huge plastic bags of rubbish sticking out of the
walls, or hands holding out small bags of cocaine or invitations to talks
on religion, but Seryozha tried to take no notice, to smile as much as
possible, and generally be optimistic.
Gradually the amount of rubbish decreased, and one quiet morning,
as Seryozha was struggling to dig his way between the roots of an old
lime tree, he discovered a small green card. This was just one day after
he learned his second important American word, 'oops' (the first one,
'bla-bla-bla', had been told to him in secret by Grisha much earlier). He
realized that now he would be able to find work, and only a couple of
days later, shortly after breakfast, Seryozha unearthed a metal door
with an illuminated sign saying 'Work'. He swallowed hard to control
his excitement and set to. The new work proved to be very like his old
job, only the drawing-desk was different, with an angled top, and the
faces of his colleagues sticking out of the wall all spoke English. When
he dug his way from lunch to the sign which said 'Don't Work' (he had
long ago managed to combine time and space into a single whole), he
realized that the working day was over.
Now Seryozha unearthed the signs 'Work' and 'Don't Work' every
day; he also began to have regular encounters with the same gleaming
door-handles, steps, and household items such as an air conditioner,
which filled everywhere with its buzzing and reminded him slightly of
a snowstorm in Moscow. All of which prompted the conclusion that he
was now living in his own apartment.
His work was not at all difficult. He had to translate old blueprints
into computer code, which was what several other employees also did.
In the morning they usually struck up a long unhurried conversation
in English, in which Seryozha gradually learned to participate. This
association with his colleagues undoubtedly had a very good effect on
him. He began to crawl in a more confident manner, and soon he 'noticed that he was again using the semi-transparent legs that he had forgotten about since he left his last job. He grew whiskers again (this time
with a clear touch of grey), not in order to merge with his fellows,
although most of them did have whiskers, but in order to lend his own

[ 147 ]

The Life of Insects

of the tunnel?'
'Are you asking me about what comes after death?' she replied. 'I
don't know. I read a couple of books about it. They write about a tunnel with a light at the end of it, but I think it's all just a load of bla-blabla.'
When he told her that he had almost become a cockroach in a distant northern country, he roused a smile of disbelief, and she said that
he didn't look anything like a Russian exile.
'You look just like a typical American cockroach,' she said.
'Oo-oops,' said Seryozha.
He was happy that he'd become so naturalized in his new home, and
he accepted the English word 'cockroach' as something like the term
'cockney', New York style, but even so, her words left him with an
uneasy feeling. One day after work, when he'd drunk quite a lot, Seryozha unearthed his flat, dug a passage to the mirror, glanced into it,
and shuddered at what he saw. Staring back at him was the triangular
brown head with long whiskers that he had seen a long time ago. Seryozha grabbed his razor, and when the soapy whirlpool in the washbasin had carried away the last of the whiskers, he saw his own face
looking out at him, but now it was distinctly elderly, almost old. He
began digging frenziedly straight through the mirror, which shattered
into fragments beneath his hands, and soon he unearthed a number of
items which indicated that he was in fact out on the street - they
included an old Korean sitting on a stool, and a sign which said '29 East
Street'. Cutting himself on a rusty tin can, he began digging quickly
and desperately straight ahead, until he found himself in a vein of
damp clayey soil somewhere around Greenwich Village, surrounded by
foundations that sank deep into the earth and concrete shafts. He
unearthed a signboard with a picture of a palm grove and the word
PARADISE in big letters. Behind it Seryozha discovered a longish staircase leading downwards, a stool, a short length of a bar, and two glasses of the vodka-tonic he had grown accustomed to.
The earth walls of the tunnel he had just dug were throbbing with
the sound of music. Seryozha downed the two glasses one after the
other and took a look around. Behind him there was a long narrow

[ 149 ]

The Life of Insects

is no other evening, and he also understood what the cicadas were
singing, or rather crying, about. He set his broad lamellae singing of the
fact that life had passed in vain, and that it could only pass in vain, and
there was no point in weeping over it. Then he straightened his wings
and flew off towards the purple glow above the distant mountain, trying to rid himself of the feeling that he was digging through the air
with his wings. He was still clutching something, and when he raised
it to his eyes he saw on his palm the crumpled and earth-stained little
box with the black palm trees, and suddenly he realized that the word
PARADISE means the place people go when they die.

[ 151 ]

The Life of Insects

but after a long struggle she managed to crawl all the way to the exit.
The accordion and the bundles were where she had left them, but they
were covered with snow; Marina decided not to bring the accordion
back, and she took only the bundles, using the accordion to brace the
covering of the entrance from the inside.
After scrambling back somehow or other to her place, Marina
looked wearily at the grey newspapers covering the bundles. She could
guess what she would find inside, and was in no hurry to open them.
The paper bore the title The Magadan Ant in large, pseudo-Slavonic
script, and above that the motto 'Long live our Magadan anthill', in
Gothic italics. Lower down there was a photograph, but Marina couldn't tell what exactly it showed because of the crust of dried blood that
covered the lower half of the bundle. The only thing she could make out
from the subheadings was that this was a Sunday issue which was
mostly devoted to cultural matters. Marina was tormented by an unfamiliar physical sensation, and she decided to read for a while to calm
herself down. She cautiously turned back the top of the page and saw
the columns of text on the other side.
The first article, entitled 'Motherhood', was written by a Major
Bugaev. When her eyes lit on the word, Marina felt her heart skip a
beat. She began reading with as much concentration as she was capable of.
'When we come into this life,' wrote the major, 'we do not wonder
where we have come from and what we were before. We do not ponder why it has happened, we simply crawl along the promenade, gazing around and listening to the sea waves gently lapping at the shore.'
Marina sighed and thought how well the major knew life. 'But the
day arrives,' she read, 'and we learn how the world is arranged, and we
understand that our first responsibility to the natural world and to
society is to give life to new generations of ants who will continue our
great cause and write new and glorious pages in our centuries-old history. This is the context in which I feel I must deal with the feelings of
the young mother. First, she feels a deep tenderness for the eggs she has
laid, which is expressed in constant care and attention. Second, she feels
a vague sadness as the result of constant reflection on the fate of her

[ 153 ]

The Life of Insects

'I'm not doing it for myself,' she said, addressing the cube of black
space in the centre of which she was standing on all fours. 'It's for the
children.'
In the first bundle Marina found Nikolai's thigh, still in its bloodcaked green trouser-leg. With her sharp mandibles Marina ripped open
the trouser-leg along the line of the red braid and peeled it off like
sausage-skin. Nikolai's thigh had a tattoo on it, jolly red ants holding
cards sitting at a table with a tall, narrow-necked bottle. Marina
thought about how she hadn't really had time to learn anything about
her husband, and then she took a small bite out of the thigh.
Nikolai tasted just as melancholy and thorough as he had been in
life, and Marina burst into tears. She remembered his strong, resilient
front legs, covered in sparse red stubble, and the way they had touched
her body, which had brought her only incomprehensible boredom, now
seemed full of warmth and tenderness. Marina fought her depression
by reading the scraps of newspaper lying on the floor in front of her.
'There is no strength left even for indignation,' wrote an unknown
author, 'one can only marvel at the shameless behaviour of the Masons
from the infamous lodge P-4 (Psychoanalysis-4), who have mocked
international public opinion for many decades and even taken their barbarous effrontery so far as to place the two grossest obscenities of the
ancient Coptic language, which the Masons use for vilifying the most
sacred objects of others' national culture, at the centre of an international scientific polemic. The two phrases in question are ''sigmund
freud'' and ''eric berne'', which in translation mean ''stinking goat'' and
''erect wolf's penis''. When will the science of Magadan, the last truly
Nordic science, shake off the years of torpor and straighten up its
mighty shoulders?'
Marina couldn't understand what this was all about. She could
guess that the article sprang from an entire world of the arts and science which she knew nothing about, but which she had glimpsed in
passing on the hoarding by the sea. It was a world populated by smiling, broad-shouldered men holding logarithmic slide-rules and books,
by children gazing dreamily into a distance invisible to adults, by
impossibly beautiful women, frozen at their drawing-boards and

[ 155 ]

The Life of Insects

ble of hope rising up from her belly. 'I'll get thin and I'll dig a way out
to the south, to the sea . . . And I'll find that general who praised Nikolai. He'll marry me, and then . . .'
Marina was afraid to think any further than that. But she felt she
was still young and full of strength, and if she didn't give up, she could
easily start all over again. Then she fell asleep and slept for a very long
time, without any dreams.
She was woken by a chomping sound. She opened her eyes and
froze in horror. Two wide expressionless eyes were watching her from
the corner. Immediately below the eyes were two sharp and powerful
jaws, which were rapidly grinding something to a pulp, and below
them there was a small, worm-like white body covered with short,
springy scales.
'Who are you?' Marina asked in fright.
'I'm your daughter, Natasha,' the creature replied.
'What are you eating?' asked Marina.
'Eggs,' Natasha mumbled innocently.
'Ah...'
Marina glanced at the niche where the eggs had been and saw that
it was empty. She turned a gaze of reproach on Natasha.
'What's to be done, Ma?' Natasha said with her mouth full. 'That's
the way life is. If Andryusha had hatched first, he would have eaten
me.'
'What Andryusha?'
'My brother,' said Natasha. 'He said to me, let's wake our ma up.
Straight out of the egg he said it to me. But I said, if you were first to
break through the egg-skin, would you wake our ma up? He didn't say
anything, so I . . .'
'Oh, Natasha, how could you?' Marina whispered, shaking her head
as she scrutinized her daughter. She was no longer thinking about the
eggs; all her feelings were swamped by the amazing awareness that this
strange creature that moved and talked so naturally was her own
daughter. Marina remembered the plywood hoarding near the videobar,
with its images of an unattainably happy life, and mentally she tried
to place Natasha on it. Natasha looked at hex without speaking, and

[ 159 ]

The Life of Insects

'What a beautiful song,' she whispered as she watched Natasha's
fingers skip over the keyboard.
Marina tried to remember the melody from the French film, humming it for her daughter as best she could. Natasha picked up the motif
immediately, played it a few times, then thought about it and played it
rather differently, and Marina remembered that was how it actually
had been in the film. After that, she had complete faith in her daughter, and when Natasha fell asleep beside her, she covered the defenceless
white sausage of her body with the blanket as though Natasha were
still an egg.
Sometimes in the evening they would dream of how Natasha would
become a famous performer and Marina would come to her concerts,
sit in the front row, and finally give way to a proud mother's tears.
Natasha loved planning the concerts: she would sit on a box in front of
her mother, pressing the accordion to her chest and playing 'On Guard
Over the Sea', or 'Midnight in Moscow'. At the most unexpected
moments, Marina would interrupt her playing with a shrill cry of 'bravo' and begin clapping furiously with the two limbs that still obeyed
her. 'Then Natasha would get up and bow, and it was as though she
had never done anything else in her life. Marina had to wipe away the
tears with a handful of straw. She felt that now she was living only
through Natasha, and all she needed from life now was happiness for
her daughter.
But the days went by, and Marina began to notice a strange lethargy in her daughter. Sometimes Natasha would suddenly stop playing
and sit there without moving, staring fixedly at the wall.
'What's wrong, daughter?' Marina would ask.
'Nothing,' Natasha would reply, and start playing again.
Sometimes she would put down the accordion and crawl into the
part of the chamber where Marina couldn't see her. At these times she
wouldn't answer any questions, and Marina didn't know what she was
doing. Sometimes her friends came visiting, but Marina never saw
them; she only heard their young, confident voices.
One day Natasha asked her: 'Ma, who has the best life, ants or flies?'

[ 161 ]

The Life of Insects

in its entrails. Marina tried again, and her head turned a little, so that
she could see the other corner of the chamber, and by turning her eyes
as far as she possibly could, she made out a small silvery cocoon hanging from the ceiling. It looked to her as though it was made of numerous layers of fine silk thread.
'Natasha,' she called again.
'What, Ma?' said a small quiet voice inside the cocoon.
'What's all this?' Marina asked.
'It's obvious,' answered Natasha. 'I'm pupating. It's time.'
'Pupating?' Marina repeated, and burst into tears. 'Why didn't you
call me? Are you completely grown up now?'
'Seems like it,' replied Natasha. 'I'll decide things for myself from
now on.'
'What are you going to do when you hatch out?' asked Marina.
'I'm going to be a fly,' Natasha said from the ceiling.
'You're joking!'
'No, I'm not. I don't want to live like you, get it?'
'Natasha darling, my little one,' wailed Marina, 'come to your senses! There's never been such a disgrace in our family!'
'Well, there will be now,' Natasha said calmly.
'The next morning Marina was woken by a squeaking sound. The
cocoon hanging from the ceiling was swaying slightly, and Marina
realized that Natasha was ready to hatch out.
'Natasha,' Marina began, trying to speak calmly, 'you must understand. In order eventually to have freedom and sunshine, you have to
work hard all your life. It's impossible otherwise. The road you're going
to follow leads to the bottom of life, where no one can save you. Do
you understand?'
The cocoon split lengthwise, and a head appeared in the top of the
opening. It was Natasha, but she was nothing like the little girl who
had spent long evenings-playing Magadan concerts with Marina.
'Where do we live then, up at the top?' she asked rudely.
'Just you wait,' Marina threatened. 'You'll come back here in rags

[ 163 ]

The Life of Insects

tration, not even turning round, despite the curses which Marina flung
at her head.
Then Marina leaned her head over as close as she could to the black
hole in the wall and shrieked: 'Help! Help! Anybody! Police!'
The only reply was the distant howl of an icy wind.
'Help! Save me!' Marina called out again.
'What are you shouting for?' Natasha asked from the ceiling. 'In the
first place, there's nobody out there, and they couldn't hear you, even
if there was.'
Marina realized that her daughter was right, and she slumped into
an indifferent haze. Up near the ceiling the trowel scraped regularly
against the earth for an hour or two, and then a ray of sunlight fell
into the chamber, and it was invaded by the long-forgotten smell of
fresh air. Marina breathed in and realized that the world she thought
had disappeared for ever along with her own youth was really very
close at hand - and now it was almost autumn there, but it would still
be warm and dry for quite a while yet.
'Bye, Ma,' said Natasha.
'She's leaving me,' Marina suddenly realized, and she shouted again:
'Natasha! At least take the handbag!' 'Thanks,' Natasha shouted back
down. 'I already have.'
She covered the hole she had dug, and once again the chamber was
dark and cold, but the few seconds of sunshine were enough for Marina to recall how things had been on that distant day when she walked
along the promenade and life murmured from the sea, whispered in the
leaves, and spoke from the sky, from the horizon, promising something
wonderful.
Marina looked at the pile of newspapers and realized sadly that this
was all she had left - or, rather, all that life had left for her. She was no
longer hurt by her daughter's behaviour, and all she hoped was that
Natasha would have better luck on the promenade. Marina knew that
her daughter would come back, but she also knew that no matter how
close Natasha might be to her, there would always be a subtle but
opaque wall between them, as though the space in which they used to
play at Magadan concerts had suddenly been divided from floor to ceil-

[ 165 ]

The Life of Insects

'Where?' Mitya asked, scared.
Dima laughed and said nothing. He walked over to the edge of the
rocky platform, almost as far as the drop into the sea, and turned
away, as though he didn't want anything to do with what was happening behind him.
Mitya looked around. The rocks on all sides had the most varied
shapes. On some of them there were tufts of grass that rustled in the
wind, making it seem as though the rocks themselves were rustling.
From behind, Dima's motionless figure also seemed like a dark outcrop
of rock.
There was nothing else on the Ledge. Mitya went over to the path
they had just walked along and began descending, clutching at the
bushes and the stones. The last time, he had been following Dima and
he didn't realize how hard it was to walk here. Somehow it had seemed
lighter then. Now that the moon was behind the rocky crest, he had to
feel with his foot for the next stone, and grope for branches to hang on
to. After a few metres of this, Mitya felt as though he were suspended
in dark space, clinging to a few rocks projecting out of nowhere, without the slightest guarantee that there would be any further support
ahead. He froze.
'Where am I going?' he thought. 'And why?'
He closed his eyes and tried to focus on his own sensations and
thoughts, but there were none. It was simply dark, cool, and quiet. He
could carry on down along the path or go back to the ledge where he
had left Dima. There didn't seem to be any real difference between the
two courses of action.
Mitya tried taking one more -step, and a stone rolled over under his
shoe. He almost went tumbling after it, but at the last second he managed to grab a thorny branch, which left deep scratches on his palm.
The stone bounced against the cliff-face, then hurtled into the rustling
bushes, and again there was silence.
'What's happening to me?' Mitya thought, licking his palm. 'Why
am I standing God knows where in total darkness waiting for my own
corpse? Is this where I've got to by flying towards the light? This isn't
what I was looking for. Maybe I don't know what it is - but it's not

[ 169 ]

The Life of Insects

Dima was standing in the same spot, in the same pose, still quite
motionless, and Mitya felt annoyed at what he thought was melodramatic behaviour.
'I understand now,' he said. 'I understand what you were talking
about. Hey.'
He slapped Dima on the shoulder, and Dima slowly turned round.
But it wasn't Dima.
It was the being of whose existence Mitya had had an intimation
just a minute earlier. There could be no mistake, although Mitya could
not say why he was so sure. But at the very instant when he saw
before him his own face, blue and exhausted, he remembered a passage
in an old Japanese book where a man has a nightmare in which he is
running along the seashore, trying to escape from his own self, risen
up out of the grave. Now the same thing was happening to him, but
there was no grave, the seashore was far below, and this was no dream
that he could wake from.
Mitya staggered back, and the corpse stepped after him. Mitya
dashed for the path leading down, but when he thought of himself
clutching the branches again, he slowed down and paused for a
moment, trying to decide which way to run. Then he felt his own hand
grasp him by the shoulder.
With a slow, caricatured movement from some sanitized horror
movie, the corpse raised its hands and took Mitya by the throat, and
Mitya felt himself also choking somebody. He squeezed with all the
strength in his fingers, and knew that in another second he would suffocate. He drew back his hands, and the fingers on his throat simultaneously relaxed.
'I get it,' Mitya thought. He turned round and raised his foot to
take a step, then felt his own hand catch him by the left shoulder again.
He felt a momentary surge of fury, lashed out at the corpse with his
foot, and when he came to his senses, he was down on all fours. He
stood up, drawing the air into his reluctant lungs with a wheezing
sound. It was very difficult, not just because he couldn't catch his
breath after the blow, but also because the corpse's fingers once again
closed on his throat in mindless determination, and in order to take a

[ 171 ]

The Life of Insects

For a few more minutes Mitya stood looking into the corpse's face.
There was nothing frightening about it; it was calm, weary, and sad,
as though the corpse were not holding his throat but rather the
handrail on the metro he was riding home on from some stale and boring job.
'If, God forbid, this happened to me,' Dima finally said from his
rock, 'the very first thing I would do would be to take a close look at
just who I have in front of me.'
Mitya took another look at the corpse's weary face and spotted a
very faint frown of sadness and resentment, the shadow of some dream
that never came true. And instead of revulsion and terror, be felt genuine pity for his corpse; as soon as that happened, the cold fingers once
again tightened on his throat, but this time Mitya felt it was some
external force choking him, and he could do nothing to slacken the grip.
He kicked the corpse's shinbone with all his might, but all he did was
bruise his toe: he might as well have kicked a pillar of salt. Coloured
stripes and spots appeared in front of his eyes. He knew he was about
to lose consciousness and that when it had strangled him the corpse
would go home to read Marcus Aurelius.
Then his attention was caught by one of the spots of colour dancing in front of his eyes. In fact, the small blue spot was not dancing but
remained perfectly still, which was why Mitya noticed it. It was the
same blue point of light which had disappeared after he had focused it
on the cicada. Mitya realized that he could use it again. He looked at the
exhausted blue face in front of him, and he felt that his fingers were no
longer clutching a throat but something soft and slightly damp.
On the ground in front of him stood a large sphere of dung, and his
arms were sunk in it almost up to the elbows.
He pulled his arms out, shook them several times in disgust, and
turned to face Dima, who had jumped down from his rock and come
over to the sphere.
'What is it?' asked Mitya.
'As if you didn't know,' said Dima. 'It's a ball of dung.'
It was true. Mitya did know what it was, and he knew very well
what to do with it.

[ 173 ]

The Life of Insects

opened his case, spat something red into a glass jar and put it back in
its place.
'That's a bit more interesting,' he said in his usual voice. 'At least I
can see how something could be made of that.'
Suddenly Sam and Arnold glanced up at a low buzzing sound from
the direction of the sea. They saw a wasp - a very rare insect in the
Crimea - approaching the wall, dressed in a dark double-breasted suit
and clutching a small Bible in his hand. His lips were extended in a
wide, joyless smile, and the sun gleamed pitilessly on his white teeth.
The wasp came closer and spoke quietly to Sam in English, pointing off
to the right with a hand weighed down by a heavy gold Rolex watch.
'Oh, God,' said Sam. 'I knew it.'
He jumped down on to the grass and waited for Arnold to go
through the complicated manoeuvre of shifting his balance, turning the
full weight of his fat body through a hundred and eighty degrees, and
hanging from the wall by his hands.
'If you want my opinion,' said Arnold, landing heavily on the grass,
'in these situations you have to be tough from the very beginning. Otherwise, it only means both sides suffer more. Never give them any reason to hope for anything.'
Sam said nothing. They walked on to the promenade and set off in
silence towards the open-air cafe.
A small crowd had gathered by one of the tables, and a single glance
was enough for them to see that something unpleasant had happened.
Sam turned pale and ran on ahead. Elbowing aside the idle spectators,
he squeezed his way through, and then froze.
Hanging from the edge of the table, swaying in the wind, was a
narrow strip of fly-paper. There were several small leaves and bits of
paper stuck to it, and in the very centre, with her head slumped forward in exhaustion, was Natasha. Her wings were stuck flat against
the tacky surface, and they were already suffused with its poisonous
slime. One of them stuck out to the side, and the other stuck up at an
indecent angle. The dark circles under her closed eyes covered half her
face, and the green dress that had captivated Sam with its bright sheen,
had turned dull and was covered in brown spots.

[ 177 ]

The Life of Insects

green screen of the cypresses which grew along the roadside. The promenade ahead was empty except for a single strange figure, half-walking, half-dancing towards him.
As he came closer, Dmitry could see it was a young boy whose eyes
were red from crying. He was moving slowly, throwing his arms out
ahead of him at every step, as though he was pushing along some
intolerably heavy burden; even though there was nothing in front of
him, he was breathing heavily, and his forehead was beaded with
sweat.
'Scuse me,' he said, 'can you tell me where the beach is? Pa said I had
to go there no matter what, but I can't see a thing in all this damn fog.'
Moscow, 1993

[ 181 ]

This Vintage International limited edition Book has been
designed and illustrated by Marianna Markaki and printed at the
Computer Deparment of Vakalo School of Art and Design in
Athens, Greece. The types used are Carmina LtBT for the text and
other indicated typefaces; the binding is by Babis Lengas. This edition comprises 5 copies; 2 for Vakalo School of Art and Design
and 3 for general use. Harcourt Brace & Company limited edition
series aims to offer the most scholarly and permanent library in the
English language of the word’s classics. This volume is printed on
acid-free, cream-wove paper with a sewn full cloth binding.

